  e-Informatica Software Engineering Journal
  Volume 19, Issue 1, pages: 1–29
  DOI: 10.37190/e-Inf250107                                                                             BibTEX



 Challenges of Requirements Communication
      and Digital Assets Verification in
           Infrastructure Projects

          Waleed Abdeen* , Krzysztof Wnuk , Michael Unterkalmsteiner ,
                             Alexandros Chirtoglou
                             *
                                 Corresponding author: waleed.abdeen@bth.se


Article info                            Abstract

Keywords:                               Background: Poor communication of requirements between clients
infrastructure                          and suppliers contributes to project overruns,in both software and
requirements                            infrastructure projects. Existing literature offers limited insights into
digital assets                          the communication challenges at this interface.
verification                            Aim: Our research aim to explore the processes and associated
validation                              challenges with requirements activities that include client-supplier
                                        interaction and communication.
Submitted: 11 Mar. 2025                 Method: we study requirements validation, communication, and
Revised: 22 Jun. 2025                   digital asset verification processes through two case studies in the
Accepted: 23 Jul. 2025                  road and railway sectors, involving interviews with ten experts across
Available online: 30 Jul. 2025          three companies.
                                        Results: We identify 13 challenges, along with their causes and
                                        consequences, and suggest solution areas from existing literature.
                                        Conclusion: Interestingly, the challenges in infrastructure projects
                                        mirror those found in software engineering, highlighting a need for
                                        further research to validate potential solutions.



1. Introduction

Developing software products and releasing them to the market is a complex process
that requires efficient communication [1]. Inefficient communication manifests itself as
communication gaps that lead to quality issues, wasted efforts, delays, and ultimately to
failure to meet the customers’ expectations [2]. Moreover, the inefficient use of requirements
artifacts, i.e., information is not tailored to the needs of the involved stakeholders, may
impede requirements communication in software projects [3]. What is common for large
software and infrastructure projects is their complexity that often implies the use of
suppliers [4] to deliver significant parts of the solution, e.g., automotive industry often uses
suppliers to develop software for cars.
     The friction-free economic principles of the software industry help involve suppliers
from geographically distant locations, primarily for cost reduction and the availability
of competence. One of the main challenges in involving suppliers is establishing good
communication principles, especially agreed quality levels, and also communicating potential
difficulties and issues early [5]. In particular, the verification of supplier deliverables against                 1

© 2025 The Authors. Published by Wrocław University of Science and Technology Publishing House.
This is an open access article under the CC BY-SA 4.0 license international.
    Abdeen et al.                             e-Informatica Software Engineering Journal, 19 (2025), 250107


    client requirements poses challenges [6]. A large contributor to this challenge is the inherent
    uncertainty in requirements, which increases the negative influence of coordination efforts
    on trust for new product development projects [7]. In project management theory, it has
    been suggested that both goal and resource interdependence between clients and suppliers
    have a positive influence on coordination and cooperation in new software development
    programs [8].
        Infrastructure projects often last decades in planning and execution [9], and involve
    a large number of specialized project teams (e.g., owners, contractors, consultants, designers)
    with specific core competencies. These projects are also featured with uncertainty, frag-
    mentation [10], and high complexity and inter-organizational task interdependence, which
    makes communication ever more important [11]. Because contracts of construction projects
    are inherently incomplete [12], understanding which challenges arise in client-supplier
    communication in design-build projects becomes critical.
        In practice, the ability to communicate clients’ needs and requirements to suppliers is
    a key success criterion in infrastructure projects [13–15]. Effective communication facilitates
    stakeholder engagement during the change management process [9] and clarifies realistic
    stakeholder expectations, while insufficient communication drives uncontrolled change and
    can contribute to project delays [16].
        Several studies have explored the challenges associated with general communication
    in large construction projects [17], requirements allocation [18], verification and valida-
    tion [19], system integration [20], the relationship between the communication-conflict
    interaction and project success [10], trust between firms and suppliers [21], encoding
    and decoding communication competencies in project management [22], or inter-cultural
    communication [23].
        However, little research effort has been dedicated to exploring the processes and associ-
    ated challenges with requirements activities that include client-supplier interaction and
    communication in infrastructure projects. Requirements communication is the process of
    communicating – both verbally and through documents – requirements and project-related
    documents between the client and the supplier. Requirements validation is the process of
    ensuring that the requirements reflect the client’s needs before designing or investing in
    building the system. Digital assets verification ensures that the delivered assets (e.g., 3D
    drawings) correspond to the requirements specifications. Figure 1 illustrates the verifica-
    tion and validation processes. It is important to note that in the verification processes
    (requirements verification and system verification), the client is not directly involved. As
    for the validation processes, the client input is important to ensure delivery of what the
         Requirements                                     System (Digital Assets)
          Verification                                         Verification              System
           (Quality)           Requirements
                                                                                     (Digital Assets)




                                       Requirements
                                        Validation                                         System
                                                                                          Validation



                                                              Client (Customer)

                            Figure 1. Verification and validation processes
2
Abdeen et al.                         e-Informatica Software Engineering Journal, 19 (2025), 250107


client wants. In infrastructure projects, tender documents, written by the client, are the
basis from which suppliers derive requirements specifications that need to be validated.
    This study is part of a research project that aims to investigate methods that can
improve functional requirements traceability at different stages in construction projects.
Functional requirements should be linked to a digital twin [24], a collection of digital assets
that represent the facility and are linked to the physical facility. Digital assets are defined
as any digital file (textual, images, audio, or video) stored on any electronic device (e.g.,
computer, mobile phone, or cloud) with the right to own the file [25]. In infrastructure
projects, Computer-Aided Design models (CAD), Building Information Models (BIM),
and System Information Models (SIM) [26] are typical digital assets. Traceability between
functional requirements and digital assets would allow for efficient and effective digital
assets verification before construction has started, enable monitoring during construction,
as well as make it possible to follow-up on the original requirements during the decades of
operation and maintenance.
    This study explores the nature of client-supplier requirements communication in large
infrastructure design-build projects, where the supplier is responsible for the design,
construction, and requirements validation and digital assets verification processes. Such
a description can help to understand the challenges that practitioners encounter and either
point to solutions that exist in the literature or describe a research gap.
    We frame our research using the design science process [27, 28], which aims to extend
knowledge by identifying and addressing specific problems in practice. We conducted two
case studies where we explored the client-supplier interface. In the two projects, Anonymous
acted as client and two other companies acted as contractor and sub-contractor. The
semi-structured interviews were designed to understand how requirements communication,
requirements validation, and the verification of deliverables are conducted. We transcribed
the audio recordings and coded the data to answer the research questions.
    We present an overview of the client-supplier interface and develop process diagrams
for each investigated case. Furthermore, we identify and describe the challenges faced by
the managers and engineers working in these processes. Finally, we map these challenges
to potential solutions from the system and software engineering domain. Identify conflicts
early, requirements abstraction, requirements are impossible to build and granularity of
traces, are challenges that are also faced in software engineering domain and are important
to address.
    The remainder of this paper is structured as follows. We present in Section 2 literature
that is related to our work. In Section 3, we present our research methodology and study
design. We present our research results in Section 4 and discuss them in Section 5. In
Section 6, we draw a conclusion from this study. And finally we list future work directions
in Section 7.




2. Related work


The focus of our investigation is the processes related to requirements engineering on the
interface between clients and suppliers in the context of construction projects. In this
section, we discuss, therefore, related work from systems engineering and communication
in large construction project research areas.                                                         3
    Abdeen et al.                        e-Informatica Software Engineering Journal, 19 (2025), 250107


    2.1. Communication in software engineering

    Communication in software engineering is essential in any project as it affects its outcome.
    Many researchers have investigated the associated challenges with communication in
    industry [3, 29, 30]. Bjarnason et al. [29] investigated geographical, cognitive, and psycho-
    logical distances in communication between teams and identified ten factors that affect
    communication. Liskin [3] investigated how artifacts support or impede requirements
    communication. They identified five challenges related to link requirements. Liebel et
    al. [30] studied communication problems in automotive requirements engineering, conclud-
    ing that it is important to establish communication channels outside the fixed organization
    structure. Other researchers [31–33] proposed solutions to tackle these challenges. Iqbal et
    al. [31] developed a framework to address communication issues during the requirements
    engineering process for software development outsourcing. Fricker et al. [32] suggested
    handshaking with implementation proposals that could be used to improve the commu-
    nication between the client and the supplier. Pernstal et al. [33] developed the BRASS
    framework to support coordination and communication of inter-departmental requirements
    in the large-scale development of software-intensive systems. However, the framework does
    not focus on requirements validation but rather on supporting the selection of the most
    suitable implementation plan. Although these studies investigate (requirements) communi-
    cation challenges and propose solutions to them, they mainly focus on inter-organization
    communication, in contrast to our study, where we focus on requirements communication
    in the client-supplier interface.


    2.2. System engineering

    RE and verification are of high interest to the system engineering community, which can
    be seen by the several conducted studies covering different system engineering processes
    and their challenges [18, 20, 34–36].
        Madni et al. [20] explored the challenges in system integration in the defense and
    aerospace domain. They propose an ontology-based system integration approach to facili-
    tate communication between the different stakeholders. Makkinga et al. [19] conducted
    semi-structured interviews in three mid-sized projects in the Netherlands. Their focus
    was on the verification and validation problems in construction projects and possible
    solutions to these problems. They advise more research work in the validation process.
    Vermillion et al. [18] compare the requirements allocation and objective allocation in
    projects with outsourced design. They propose an approach for requirements allocation for
    the design process. Moreover, they see an asymmetry in knowledge between the clients
    who outsource the design and agents designing the system, which needs to be addressed to
    reduce negotiation iterations.
        System engineering processes and practices in the construction domain have also
    been of interest to researchers [35, 36]. Lynghaug et al. [35] explored the state of system
    engineering practices in the Norwegian construction domain. They conclude by providing
    recommendations on implementing and improving system engineering practices in the
    construction domain. One of the most critical system engineering processes is requirements
    analysis. Raatikainen et al. [37] highlighted the challenge of efficient communication
    and management of requirements in the nuclear energy domain. De Graaf et al. [36]
    investigated the state of practice of six cases of sub-contracted design work in civil
4   engineering projects. They identified three factors that affect the sub-contracted work,
Abdeen et al.                        e-Informatica Software Engineering Journal, 19 (2025), 250107


mainly: Building Information Model (BIM) interoperability, time pressure, and employee
availability.



2.3. Communication in large construction projects


In large construction projects, communication is essential to the success of the project,
and conflicts could lead to communication breakdowns and project failure as illustrated
in multiple studies [9, 10, 17, 38]. Wu et al. [10] investigated the relationship between the
communication-conflict interaction and project success. Malik and Taqi [17] explored the
relationship between communication and the success of construction projects. They found
that process conflict and relationship conflict have a negative impact on communication and
project success. Saxena and McDonagh [38] have investigated communication breakdowns
and concluded that change management requires a multilevel communication approach.
Furthermore, communication could be an enabler to other activities in the project. Butt et
al. [9] have looked into how effective communication facilitates stakeholder engagement
during the change management process and changing project culture. Communication
is a powerful tool in ensuring participation in change management processes. Lack of
communication leads to teams focusing on task performance and efficiency rather than
empowerment and involvement.
    Communication is even more essential in global projects, where cultural changes added
more complexity, as it continues to shows [22, 23, 39–41]. Loosemore and Muslmani [23]
investigated intercultural communication challenges in Persian Gulf projects, highlighting
the need for a better understanding of cultural diversity. Similar recommendations were
reported by Ochieng and Price, who studied the cultural variation of project managers in
Kenya and the UK in communicating effectively on multicultural projects [39]. Henderson
et al. [41] looked into the impact of communication norms on global project teams and
individuals’ project satisfaction and performance. In another study [22], the researchers
also looked into encoding and decoding communication competencies in project manage-
ment. Daim et al. [40] have also looked into communication breakdowns among global
virtual teams, and these breakdowns tend to threaten project delivery. The authors found
five factors impacting communication breakdowns: trust, interpersonal relations, cultural
differences, leadership and technology.
    These studies show the importance and consequences of communication in construction
projects. However, they are mainly focused on people’s communications rather than artifacts
of communication, which we focus on in our study.



2.4. Research gap


Requirements validation, communication and digital assets verification are important
in avoiding project failures [15, 42]. While researchers from the software engineering
domain have investigated the area [43, 44], it remains greatly unexplored or neglected
in the system engineering domain. Hence, due to the lack of studies that investigate
requirements validation, requirements communication and digital assets verification in the
system engineering domain, we are conducting this study to fill this gap.                            5
    Abdeen et al.                            e-Informatica Software Engineering Journal, 19 (2025), 250107


    3. Methodology

    Due to the aim of the research project as a whole, which is to identify and address problems
    related to the requirements communication process and the traceability of functional
    requirements to the digital twin, we frame our research as design science problem [27, 28].
    Hevner [45] has depicted design science as a process intertwining relevance, rigor, and design
    cycles. In the study reported in this paper, we investigate the challenges of client-supplier
    communication in system engineering projects; in other words, we identify the relevance
    of the problem in the infrastructure domain. Thereafter, we plan to design a solution
    for one of the problems we identify in this study, apply it to the problem, and further
    improve it (design). Finally, we plan to verify that the solution fits the problem through
    implementation to other problem instances from the software engineering domain (rigor).
    In this study, we focus only on determining the relevance of the problem.
        We designed the study according to the case study guidelines by Runeson et al. [46],
    who advocate for defining a detailed case study protocol that reflects the changes made
    during the iterative process of data collection and analysis. The research questions with
    the motivation and alignment to our objective are listed in Table 1.
                                        Table 1. Research questions

      Id     Research question                       Motivation
      RQ1    What are the practices and challenges   One of the main documents that are communicated
             in system requirements validation?      between the client and the supplier in design-build
                                                     contracts are system requirements. Hence it is impor-
                                                     tant to have those requirements validated. We explore
                                                     the system requirements validation process and the
                                                     challenges associated with it.
      RQ2    What are the practices and challenges   Explore the requirements communication process be-
             in system requirements communica-       tween the client and the supplier, and what different
             tion between the client and the sup-    formats the requirements take before they are trans-
             plier?                                  lated into a design. Moreover, we want to explore
                                                     the difficulties in the process and opportunities for
                                                     improvements.
      RQ3    What are the practices and challenges   Explore any quality checks done by the client or the
             in digital assets verification?         supplier on the design documents and any challenges
                                                     associated with the process.




    3.1. Case description

    The two cases were selected from Anonymous’ projects based on availability and access to
    information. Both projects distinguish between project-specific requirements and regulatory
    requirements. Project-specific requirements describe needs that pertain to the particular
    facility, originating from diverse stakeholders such as the government, communes, and land
    owners. Regulatory requirements define needs that are relevant to all applicable facilities.
    While the client specifies the project-specific requirements, it is the responsibility of the
    supplier to identify and comply with the relevant regulatory requirements for the designed
    facility.
        Case One is a road project that includes the design and building of roads and bridges
    for cars, pedestrians, and cyclists. At the time of the study (April-June 2020), the project
6   was in construction (3 years duration). Case One, with a budget of 35M USD, is part of
Abdeen et al.                              e-Informatica Software Engineering Journal, 19 (2025), 250107


a larger road project with an estimated duration of 30 years (15 planning, 15 construction)
and a budget of 4B USD. Case Two has specified approximately 700 project-specific
requirements and is associated with 12 000 regulatory requirements.
    Case Two is a railway project with the design and build of a high-speed train connection,
including rail, bridges, and tunnels. The project was in its early stages (requirements
specification and initial design) at the time of the study. The estimated project duration for
Case Two is 34 years (9 pre-study, 10 planning, 15 construction) and a budget of 8.8B USD.
Case Two has specified approximately 1 000 project-specific requirements and is associated
with approximately 15 000 regulatory requirements1 .

3.2. Data collection

We conducted semi-structured interviews with the participants from all three companies
listed in Table 2. Semi-structured interviews are fit for a study where a clear hypothesis
does not exist and the research questions are of explorative nature [46]. In our case, we
explored the system engineering processes that involve client-supplier communication, but
we don’t know to what extent these processes were implemented.
                                     Table 2. Companies overview

 Company                  Industry                      Role                Case           Company size
       A     Construction                         Contractor     Case One                          45 000
       B     Design                               Sub-Contractor Case One                           6 000
       C     Transportation and Infrastructure    Client         Case One, Case Two                 9 400
 The unit of measure for company size is the average number of employees.

    We formulated the interview questions in three main themes, according to our stated
research questions: requirements validation, requirements communication, and digital assets
verification. Then we adapted the interview questions to each interviewee role. For example,
when we interviewed a requirements engineer, we focused our questions on requirements
validation and requirements verification. During each interview, we asked (on average)
14 pre-defined questions about the topics, excluding follow-up questions. We present here
a few examples of the questions that we asked during the interviews: on the topic of
requirements communication we asked questions such as “Q: How do you receive the
requirements specified by the client?” and “Q: Do you experience any challenges in
requirements’ communication?”, on the topic of requirements validation we asked “Q:
Explain the requirements validation process?”, and in the area of digital assets verification
we asked “Q: What is the next step after the digital assets are produced?”, and “Q: How
do you ensure that the produced digital assets satisfy the requirements”.
    We interviewed ten people from three companies. Table 3 shows their roles, companies,
and industry experience. The interviewees had between 7 and 24 years of experience and
worked in roles related to requirements engineering, design, and project management.
Convenience sampling was used when choosing the participants for the interviews. We
asked our company contacts for people who work with requirements and system design,
then they suggested people based on their availability. In Case 2, we only interviewed
   1
     In both projects, the number of project-specific requirements varied over time. Furthermore, the number
of associated regulatory requirements is an estimate by a requirements engineering lead at Anonymous.
Determining the exact numbers would require that every contractor keeps track of the regulations they
need to comply to, which is, as we shall see, not the case.                                                    7
    Abdeen et al.                             e-Informatica Software Engineering Journal, 19 (2025), 250107


    people from the client side as we didn’t have access to suppliers. In this paper, we use the
    acronym XY to reference interviewees, where X is a letter referencing the company [A,B,C]
    and Y is a number referencing an interviewee in that company.
                                          Table 3. Interviewees roles
                    Id                 Role                 Company           Experience
                    A1   Design Manager                         A        20+ years
                    A2   Tender Manager                         A        10 years
                    A3   BIM Manager                            A        7 years
                    A4   Design Manager                         A        10 years
                    B1   Discipline Leader                      B        15 years
                    B2   Head of Design                         B        25 years
                    C1   BIM Specialist                         C        9 years
                    C2   Requirements Specialist                C        11 years
                    C3   Requirements Engineer                  C        8 years
                    C4   Head of Tech and Environment           C        24 years
                    The experience presented in this table is the overall industry experience.

        Two to three researchers attended the interviews (observer triangulation). The first
    author led the interview by asking questions, and the other two authors observed and
    asked follow-up questions if necessary. We conducted each interview as follows:
    1. A week before the interview, we sent the informed consent letter to the participants
        and asked them to return a signed copy within two weeks after the interview.
    2. Before the interview started, we briefly described the purpose of our study, and the
        expected outcome and explained how we are going to conduct the interview.
    3. We started recording the interview and asked the questions.
        After we finished conducting the interviews, the first author transcribed them. The third
    author listened to the interviews’ recordings to verify the transcript. We sent each transcript
    out to the interviewees for comments. We received corrections from one participant,
    clarifying statements that were incomplete due to recording issues caused by the recording
    equipment.

    3.3. Data analysis

    We coded the interview transcripts with an initial set of codes that the first and third author
    created in alignment with the research questions. The first author quoted and labeled parts
    of the transcript using these codes. Feedback sessions were conducted between the first and
    third author to refine the codes. Several coding iterations were done until we had enough data
    to answer the research questions. A final verification of the quoted text was done by the third
    author. The codes were created on different levels of abstraction, as seen in Figure 2. Initially,
    we started with 14 abstract codes: artifacts, roles, tolls, processes, important statements
    and challenges, digital assets implementation, digital assets verification, requirements
    elicitation, requirements specifications, requirements communication, requirements change,
    and requirements validation. We derived compound codes by combining two or more abstract
    codes (e.g., requirements validation-process). Then, we added additional codes as needed.
    This helped us to use relevant codes when answering the research questions, as exemplified
    next.
    Coding example When coding the answers to the interview questions related to the
8   requirements validation process, we started with the codes: 1) requirements validation
Abdeen et al.                                e-Informatica Software Engineering Journal, 19 (2025), 250107


                   Level 1          Tools           Artifacts                 Processes
                  (groups)
                                    Tool 1
                   Level 2          Tool 2
                (concrete)



                                                                             Process-Tool
                   Level 3
                (concrete)



                             Legend
                             Code


                                        Figure 2. Coding levels

process to quote the activities associated with the requirements validation process and
2) requirements validation challenge, to quote the challenges of that process. These codes
were part of the group requirements validation. Then we added more codes based on the
content, e.g., requirements documentation and cost estimation to quote the artifacts used
in the validation process. After that, we created codes on a higher abstraction level, e.g.,
tools, artifacts, and processes.
    Using this way of coding resulted in codes on different abstraction levels. This helped
retrieve all information in a whole area, e.g., the requirements validation process, and in
detail in that process, e.g., actors in the requirements validation process.


4. Results

We present the results in three sections following the themes of the interview questions:
requirements validation, requirements communication, and digital assets verification. In
each section, we describe the process and the challenges faced in that process. A challenge
is presented as the description, causes, and consequences of that challenge. Some challenges
have no causes or/and consequences since we could not identify them from the interviews. We
illustrate the results in figures that show the process flow, artifacts, and actors. Each figure
is divided into columns representing the parties involved in the project: client, contractor,
or subcontractor. In some figures, there is a question mark which is a placeholder for
information that was not clear from the interviews.

4.1. Requirements validation

Figure 3 depicts the requirements validation process in Case One. At the contractor, the
tender manager and their team conduct a review process. The inputs to the process are
the technical description and the general regulations (local to the country) that apply to
the project. The output of the process is a cost estimate spreadsheet, which estimates the
project cost and is used when preparing the contract for the project. Another requirements
review process is conducted at the subcontractor by the discipline leaders and designers.                    9
     Abdeen et al.                                                   e-Informatica Software Engineering Journal, 19 (2025), 250107

     Legend                                                Client (C)                   Contractor (A)                  Subcontractor (B)
         Process Start        Challenge
                                                     Process Start              Ch1
           Requirements         Manual
           Document             Process
                                                     Tender Documents
           Design               Collection of
           Document             Documents
                          -
           Financial            Documents
           Document             Flow                                                    - Tender Manager              - Discipline Leaders
                                                           Technical                      - Tender Team                    - Designers
           Role                 Model Flow                Description
                                Database
           Entity
                                (semi)-auto                                    Rules &      Reviewing       Cost                       Design
                                                                                                                           Review
                                process                                       Regulations                Estimation                   Guidelines


          Figure 3. Requirements validation – Case one, the abbreviation (ch) refers to challenge,
                          both the abbreviations and legend apply to all figures


                                   Client (C)                                                            Contractor

        Process Start                     Ch1          Ch2




       Railway                     - Head Of Unit
      Regulations                    - Specialists



       Technical                           Partial
        System                             Check
       Standards

                                                Figure 4. Requirements validation – Case two

     They take as input the technical description from the contractor and the general regulations.
     The output of this process is the design guidelines document that helps designing the
     models for the project.
        Figure 4 shows the requirements validation process in Case Two. The client conducts
     a partial check on the requirements. The inputs to this check are the railway regulations
     and technical system standards and the outputs are the validated requirements. We do not
     have information about the requirements validation process on the contractor side, because
     the people we interviewed in Case Two are from the client-side.
        We have identified the following two challenges that are faced by the roles involved in
     the requirements validation process.

     4.1.1. Challenge 1: Prioritizing the requirements validation process

     Prioritizing the requirements validation process is a challenge faced by the contractor
     in Case One and the client in Case Two. The time to validate the requirements by the
     contractor is seen to be short in Case One, as reported by the tender manager (A2). When
     the tender project is announced, the contractor has to respond with the cost estimate
     in a matter of weeks. This makes the validation of the requirements challenging for the
10   contractor who has to do it in a short time. “The client spends four years coming up
Abdeen et al.                              e-Informatica Software Engineering Journal, 19 (2025), 250107


with the design (presented by the requirements), and we have to price it in four or eight
weeks, coupled with a tender model that is purely price-driven. It is a very unhealthy
situation” (A2). The requirements validation process requires experience and knowledge in
the discipline, which makes the prioritization of this process and finding the right people
to perform it difficult for the client. “When you talk about validating requirements, it is
not our top priority” (C2).
    Ambiguous and conflicting requirements is a cause of this challenge in Case One. The
requirements validation process could take more than a couple of months when the supplier
finds requirements that need clarification or revision by the client. In Case Two, lack of
resources is seen as a cause of this challenge. As C2 said, “there are not enough railway
specialists in the company.” The people involved in Case Two are involved in other projects
and have other responsibilities at the client, making it difficult to find the right people to
validate the requirements.
    The requirements validation process is overlooked is seen by the client as a consequence
of not prioritizing the said process. Since it is not always feasible to allocate resources
for the validation process, it gets less priority over other activities, leading to the process
being skipped in many cases. Furthermore, the contractor sees added responsibility as
a consequence. Since the contractor submits the bid to the project based on the requirements,
they take the responsibility if they have not validated the requirements properly: “Do not
put all the risk on us if we can’t find the problem in such a short time” (A2).


4.1.2. Challenge 2: Identify conflicts early


It could be difficult to identify conflicts in the requirements early as seen in Case Two by
the requirements engineer (C3) and head of environment (C4). Although a partial check
on the requirements is conducted at the client side, some conflicts may go undetected until
later at the design stage. For example, when verifying tunnel-related requirements, one
(requirements engineers or designers) may not be able to identify water pipes intersection
with an obstacle due to the land geometry. “It is hard to see that before when you haven’t
drawn the lines for the pipes or the tunnel” (C3).
    The main cause of this challenge is not clear. When we asked C3 whether the lack of
information or having too much information is the cause of difficulties identifying those
conflicts, they answered “it depends” (C3).


                     Client (C)                Contractor (A)                   Subcontractor (B)

            Process Start                Ch3     Ch5                      Ch3      Ch4     Ch5

                Tender Documents




                    Technical                        - Project Leaders              - Discipline Leaders
                   Description                       - Tender Manager                    - Designers
                                        Rules &                           Rules &
                                       Regulations                       Regulations


                            Figure 5. Requirements communication – Case one
                                                                                                           11
     Abdeen et al.                                        e-Informatica Software Engineering Journal, 19 (2025), 250107


     4.2. Requirements communication

     Figure 5 shows the requirements communication process in Case One. The project’s
     technical requirements, called technical description document, are a part of the tender
     documents. The project leaders and tender manager on the contractor side get the technical
     description from the client, and then they communicate these documents to the discipline
     leaders and designers on the subcontractor side. Additional requirements from the rules
     and regulations apply to the project in Case One. The contractor and subcontractor are
     responsible for finding those additional requirements that apply to the project.

                                          Client (C)                                         Contractor

                     Process Start       Ch4        Ch6     Ch7




                  Technical System       Railway
                     Standards          Regulations



                       Local                              Plant-Specific Lime                       ?
                     Government                           Requirements          Negotation
                                                           for Railway

                   Maintainance          Property
                   Department            Owners             DOORS


                                     Figure 6. Requirements communication – Case two


         Figure 6 shows the requirements communication process in Case Two. In this case,
     there are three main types of requirements sources: 1) documents, e.g., technical system
     standards, or railway regulations; 2) internal or external departments, e.g., local government
     or maintenance department; and 3) people who reside or work in the project area and
     who could be affected by the project outcome, e.g., property owners. The client compiles
     the requirements from all the mentioned sources into project-specific requirements for the
     railway. Those requirements are stored in a software called LIME, which is used to negotiate
     requirements between the client and the contractor. The documents stored in LIME are
     living documents, where both the client and supplier communicate the requirements and
     their feedback through an iterative process. After the client and the contractor have agreed
     on the requirements, those requirements are stored in DOORS2 .
         The interviewees reported five challenges in relation to requirements communication.

     4.2.1. Challenge 3: Misinterpretation of requirements

     All parties working on the project have access to the same requirements documents, however,
     each party has their interpretation that could differ from the other parties’ interpretation.
     This was reported in both cases by the design manager (A1), tender manager (A2), and
     discipline leader (B1). Moreover, the requirements can be unclear or difficult to understand.
     As one interviewee on the subcontractor side mentioned, “we have had a whole lot of
     discussions regarding these requirements in the technical description, and it is constantly
     not crystal clear, so it is very much up to interpretation” (B1). Also, the client thinks that

12      2
            Requirements management software.
Abdeen et al.                        e-Informatica Software Engineering Journal, 19 (2025), 250107


they could improve their writing; as C4 said, “we often think that we are quite clear in our
communication, but often it’s not the case” (C4).
    Lack of knowledge in local projects and requirements are open for interpretation are
of the causes of this challenge, as seen by the interviewees. Some people working on the
project may lack experience in projects from the this specific country, which could lead
to a different interpretation of the requirements. “If you have any country A engineer
and you want to make a bridge design, his background is slightly or completely different
from the country B engineer” (A2). The subcontractor sees it as one of the causes of
misinterpretation of requirements as put by one interviewee “There is never really a correct
answer. There is not just one solution that you can do” (B1).
    The misinterpretation of requirements may lead to rework and extra costs. If the
subcontractor’s interpretation is different from the client’s interpretation, then additional
work should be done by the subcontractor. As B1 said, “if our interpretation of the
requirements is not that what the client wants us to do, then there is some additional
work for us” (B1). In special cases, the misinterpretation of requirements could lead to
extra costs paid by the contractor, as confirmed by A1, “I was not informed at all what
a requirement (temporary use of land for the project) means”.


4.2.2. Challenge 4: Long time to communicate requirements (changes and questions)


The requirements communication process between the different parties (client-supplier)
takes a long time. This process includes requirements change requests and any requirements-related
questions raised by the contractor or subcontractor. This challenge was seen in Case One
and Case Two by the discipline leader (B1) and the head of environment (C4). All
requirements-related communications between the client and subcontractor go through the
contractor, which takes a long time: “it could take quite a bit of time” (B1). The client
also sees that the change process takes a long time from the contractor side as well. C4
gave an example of a case, “one occasion we did a very big change of the requisition of the
whole project… but then it took like a year for the consultants to respond and tell us how
the changes would be interpreted and implemented” (C4).
    The interviewees did not explicitly identify the causes or consequences of this challenge.


4.2.3. Challenge 5: Finding the correct information


The documents communicated by the client do not include all the requirements that apply
to the project, and it is challenging to find all requirements that apply by the contractor
and subcontractor. This challenge was reported in Case One by the design manager (A4)
and head of design (B2). As seen in Figure 5 and Figure 6, there are additional requirements
documents that the client does not communicate as part of the tender documents. Those
documents are local rules and regulations. The client only refers to those documents, and
the contractor and subcontractor need to find those documents. “The tricky task to make
sure you have all requirements that have to be followed” (A4).
    A cause of this challenge is Lack of knowledge in local projects, similar to that of
miss-interpretation of requirements challenge explained in Section 4.2.1. Some people with
different background could lack experience in projects in a specific country. In this case,
people with experience in local projects are consulted to find the right information.                13
     Abdeen et al.                                              e-Informatica Software Engineering Journal, 19 (2025), 250107


     4.2.4. Challenge 6: Requirements elicitation and validation with non-technical stakeholders


     The requirements elicitation and validation process is a challenging task since many
     stakeholders are involved. This challenge was reported in Case Two by a requirements
     engineer (C3). The client elicits requirements from many sources and stakeholders, as seen
     in Figure 6. Therefore, the way the client communicates the requirements needs to be
     adapted to the audience. “We can have a super model to communicate with the supplier,
     but we can’t use that one when we meet the restaurant owner in the city” (C3).
         The cause of seeing the requirements elicitation and validation process as a challenging
     task is because there are different parties and many stakeholders with different backgrounds
     involved in the process.
         This challenge adds additional work to the client, as the client needs to adapt the
     requirements to the audience. For example, sketches and drawings need to be done so the
     client can communicate the requirements with the property owners.


     4.2.5. Challenge 7: Requirements abstraction


     The requirements communicated by the client would likely have variations in abstraction
     levels. The challenging part is to find the right level of granularity for these requirements.
     This is reported in Case Two by the head of environment (C4). A too specific requirement
     could constrain the supplier in developing the solution, “sometimes we were getting the
     wrong answer when we are too specific in demands” (C4), and a too abstract requirement
     is open for miss interpretation “often we have to explain more to make the requirements
     more specific” (C4).
         We did not identify clear causes or consequences for this challenge from the interviews.
     The interviewee did not have a concrete answer about what could be causing such a challenge
     and what could be the consequences.


                             Client (C)                                 Contractor (A)                            Subcontractor (B)

                       Tender Documents                                                              Process Start     Ch8
     -



          Technical       Technical                                                                            Model
                         Description              Technical                Checking                                    - Head of Design
           Check
                                                  Specialists              Engineer      Design                           - Designers
                                                                                         Manual      Checklist

                                                      ?                 Partial Check                                        Review

                                                                                                  Model &
                       ?                                                                          Extra Info
                       BATMAN                     BIM Reqs
                                    BIM                                   BIM Expert                               BIM
                                 Specialists                                                                      Manager
         Consistency
           Check
                                  Partial                                   Semi                                  Review
                                               BIM Req Clash BIM Reqs                                                         Clash BIM Reqs
                                  Check                                   Automated
                                                Check Detection                                                              Detection
                                                                 Ch9



                                            Figure 7. Digital assets verification – Case one
14
Abdeen et al.                              e-Informatica Software Engineering Journal, 19 (2025), 250107


4.3. Digital assets verification

Figure 7 shows the digital assets verification process in Case One. There are two verification
processes present in the figure. The technical check is the process of verifying the produced
digital assets’ conformity with the specified technical requirements. The consistency check
is the process of verifying the conformity of digital assets with the BIM requirements. BIM
requirements specifies how the design models should be delivered (e.g., the file’s extension
to be used for delivering a model, or the units of measure used).
    As the subcontractor designers produce the model, a review process is conducted
by those designers and the head of design. The process takes as input 1) the produced
model, which could be 2D drawings/3D models/BIM, 2) a checklist that is prepared by the
designers based on the technical requirements before the implementation, 3) the technical
requirements of the project. The output model of this process, along with BIM requirements,
goes into a clash detection tool, which checks whether the models have any conflict in
design objects. After that, a manual review process is made by the BIM manager.
    At the contractor, a similar verification process on the model is followed. First, a tech-
nical check is done with the design manual, which is produced at the beginning of the
project. This check is done by a checking engineer and is mainly based on experience
with verification of similar models. The model is sent to the BIM expert who conducts
pre-configurated semi-automated checks on the attributes of the BIM objects based on the
client’s BIM requirements, using internal tools with customizable configuration possibilities.
The technical and consistency check is an iterative process.
    Then the model is sent to the client for approval. At the client, there are technical
specialists who do their own technical checks while taking technical requirements as input.
After that, a series of consistency checks are conducted: clash detection, BIM requirements
check, and partial check by BIM specialists. When the model passes all those checks, it is
stored in the appropriate database.

                              Client (C)                               Contractor

                       Ch10      Ch11      Ch12    Ch13       Process Start




           Technical
            Check                    Specialist                       ?



                                      Manual                          ?             Model
                                      Review


                         Figure 8. Digital assets verification – Case two


    Figure 8 presents the digital assets verification process in Case Two. When the models
are delivered to the client for approval, the specialist in the domain conducts a manual
review process to verify those models. We also know that there is some kind of check being
done by the contractor.
    We have identified six challenges related to the process of digital assets verification.               15
     Abdeen et al.                         e-Informatica Software Engineering Journal, 19 (2025), 250107


     4.3.1. Challenge 8: Requirements are impossible to build

     In some cases, during the verification of digital assets, engineers detect requirements that are
     impossible to build. This challenge was reported in Case One by the discipline leader (B1).
     The contractor and subcontractor are limited by what they can change in the requirements.
     Then during the verification of digital assets, some requirements appear to be impossible
     to build. “The solution that company C stated simply can’t be done” (B1). Although the
     client may be validating the requirements, it is still the contractor’s and subcontractor’s
     responsibility to make sure those requirements are sound and possible to build.
         The client specifies solutions rather than requirements were the cause of this challenge.
     The requirements provided by the client do not have much room for the contractor or
     subcontractor to come up with a solution. Rather the requirements specify an actual
     solution that the contractor and subcontractor need to follow. Therefore, if those require-
     ments/solutions have conflicts, they will likely show during the verification process of the
     digital assets (since they might be overlooked in the requirements validation process, as
     discussed in Section 4.1.1.
         The consequence of this challenge is extra effort spent on rework to be done by the
     subcontractor. During the verification process, if some requirements were detected to be
     impossible to build, then the subcontractor needs to come up with a new solution, verify
     it, and request a change for requirements.

     4.3.2. Challenge 9: Difficulty understanding BIM requirements

     Some consultants working on the project are not fluent or familiar with the language
     in which the requirements documents are written, as reported in Case One by the BIM
     manager (A3). It is difficult for those consultants to understand the BIM requirements.
     Although the consultants translate those documents into their language, they are not
     confident that the translation is accurate.
         Consultants are unfamiliar with the documents’ language was identified as the cause of
     this issue. “The language is always a problem when you are an international consultant” (A3).
         Long time spent at the beginning is the consequence of this challenge. At the beginning
     of the project, it took a while for both the client and the contractor to coordinate and make
     sure that they were on the same page; as mentioned by A3 “It took some time coordinating
     with the client to understand the requirements” (A3).
         This challenge is not specified to BIM requirements only. The project has many people
     (requirements engineers and designers) with different language proficiency, whom may find
     it difficult to interpret the requirements if the translation is inaccurate.

     4.3.3. Challenge 10: Requirements management tool related

     In Case Two, one of the identified challenges is related to using the requirements management
     tool DOORS. This challenge was reported by the requirements specialist (C2). People
     would prefer to use conventional tools like spreadsheets over a specialized new system
     like DOORS; as mentioned by C2, “specialists don’t really like new systems” (C2). It is
     challenging to get people working on the tool. Another part of this challenge is related to
     reaching models from within DOORS. “When specialists review stuff, they need to go to
     the specific document in the specific models to look, and they can’t just click on the link,
16   which is annoying” (C2). The delivered models are verified in a different system, and it
Abdeen et al.                         e-Informatica Software Engineering Journal, 19 (2025), 250107


could be difficult to find the model and the related requirements during the review process
by the client’s engineers.
    The causes we identified for this challenge are use of yet another new tool and the
limitation of the tool DOORS. The requirements management tool DOORS is new for many
specialists working on the project, and they are not familiar with it; also, some specialists
already maintain different systems. “It is a lot for people that already maintain like fifteen
different systems so that was an issue to make them like DOORS” (C2). Also, DOORS has its
limitations, e.g., “you can’t do hyperlinks in the attribute in DOORS” (C2). Currently, using
the tool to link the requirements to a specific attribute or part of the model is not possible.
    This challenge leads to unnecessary work for the requirements specialist and extra effort
by the people verifying the models. Since DOORS is a new system for people to use, the
requirements specialist does spend time preparing views and arranging requirements to
make it easy for people involved in the review process. “I have to be involved quite a bit
just for them to know where to look” (C2). Additionally, since the tool has a limitation in
linking requirements to the detailed model implementations, model verification requires
extra effort. As explained by C2 “they need to be ready to open several different models
which take time to load” (C2).
    It is important to note here that this challenge does not point out the deficiencies of
a specific tool, but rather the lack of integration of the many tools an engineer needs to
use to perform their work.

4.3.4. Challenge 11: Granularity of traces

The traces created between the requirements and the models are of high abstraction.
This was reported in Case Two by the requirements specialist (C2). There is information
used in DOORS to trace requirements to the created models. However, this traceability
information is not detailed enough, which makes it difficult to do the verification process.
It is challenging to create those kinds of traces as it is seen to be an expensive practice.
    Requirements are not linked to objects is seen to be as the cause of this challenge, “even
though they give you a specific place to look there will be lots of places to look at” (C2).
The current traces are created between requirements and models rather than requirements
and the objects.
    One consequence of this challenge is that an extra effort is required to verify the model
as C2 explained “it just takes some time and effort” (C2). Since the requirements are linked
to models rather than objects within the model, it takes extra effort and time from the
specialist to verify the model.

4.3.5. Challenge 12: Lack of Experience Using Tools

There is a lack of experience in using the modeling tools by the people verifying the design
models. This challenge was reported in Case Two by the requirements specialist (C2). The
manual model review process, at the client in Case Two, depends mainly on the experience
of the specialists. Although, DOORS contains traces between requirements and models,
the specialists verifying the model must know where in the model the requirements apply.
The specialists lack experience verifying those models, as (C2) put it “We are not very
experienced using the model, so that’s a challenge for all specialists” (C2).
    The use of different models in the project is the cause of this challenge. There are too
many model types used in the project; these models require different tools for viewing. It            17
     Abdeen et al.                          e-Informatica Software Engineering Journal, 19 (2025), 250107


     is difficult for specialists to cope with all these tools. C2 said, “we can not choose exactly
     what they are going to use; unfortunately, some consultants use different BIM modeling
     programs” (C2).
         Difficulty navigating the models is a consequence of lacking the experience in verifying
     the models. Since the digital assets verification process at the client in Case Two is an
     experience-based process, it gets difficult to navigate the models to verify them. The
     specialist needs to figure out where in the model the specific requirements apply.

     4.3.6. Challenge 13: Verifying all requirements

     The client finds it challenging to verify all the requirements in the delivered model. This
     was reported in Case Two by the requirements specialist (C2). There are many generic and
     project-specific requirements that apply to the models; it becomes troublesome to verify
     whether the models conform to all requirements.
         The absence of risk analysis for the requirements makes the verification of all require-
     ments difficult. There exists no risk analysis nor classification of requirements based on
     severity or importance. Therefore, the client has no basis on which to base the prioritization
     for verification and resource allocation.
         As a consequence, there is an Uncertainty in the verification process at the client side.
     Currently, it is not determined if a complete model verification, for all requirements that
     apply, is necessary or not. “There is a debate at the client whether or not we are supposed
     to do a complete verification or just sample verification and see” (C2).


     5. Discussion

     In this section, we discuss the implications of our study results for research and practitioners.
     We start by discussing the client-supplier communication cycle. Then we look at the
     challenges and identify potential solution areas from the literature. Finally, we discuss the
     role of the requirements documents in client-supplier communication.

     5.1. Client-supplier communication

     There are differences between the two cases in the way the requirements are communicated.
     In Case One, the client documented and released the requirements to the suppliers once, at
     the beginning of the project (Figure 5), while in Case Two, the requirements specification
     is a more mature process, as it adopts an iterative approach where the client and the
     contractor (i.e, supplier) negotiate the requirements before they are stored in a requirements
     management tool (Figure 6). Early requirements negotiation supports more correct and
     feasible requirements specification [47], and is part of the recipe of the system engineering
     best practices [48]. The requirements process in Case Two follows best practices and is,
     therefore, superior to the process in Case One.
         The development of the requirements specifications in an infrastructure project is
     shared between the client and supplier, as the latter is expected to do their own analysis
     of the requirements, elicit the missing ones, and ensure that they align with the client’s
     expectations. This is in contrast to software engineering projects where the client is normally
     responsible for sharing a set of requirements that aligns with their needs. However, in the
18   public domain, the development of the requirements specifications in software projects
Abdeen et al.                                e-Informatica Software Engineering Journal, 19 (2025), 250107


could be similar to infrastructure projects. In a case study conducted by Brataas et al.,
[49] to investigate an innovation partnership project in the Norwegian medical sector, the
development of the requirements was a joint effort between the client procurement team
and multiple suppliers, which allowed the procurement team to focus on innovation. Moe
et al. [50] made a similar observation in their study on information systems requirements
in public sector projects: the dialogue between the client and supplier complements the
project’s requirements specification.
    In Case One, every party involved in the project does their verification for the delivered
digital assets. The technical check, as we see in Figures 7 and 8, is a sample check done
manually. There are two drawbacks of this check: 1) it is time consuming, and 2) it does
not verify all parts of the delivered digital assets. The supplier takes responsibility for the
issues that show later in the project due to unverified requirements. A similar observation
was made by Makkinga et al. [19], where a supplier carried the responsibility of the
verification when the contractor did not have enough resources to conduct a complete
verification. Consistency checks, which verify whether the design conforms to the general
design requirements such as correct use of units of measurement or file formats, are done
(semi-)automatically, as shown in Figure 7. We believe that developing a common checklist
would have been beneficial in the early identification of potential issues to requirements.
Moreover, we speculate that communication between two parties with various levels of
domain knowledge could be facilitated by communication brokers [51].
    The life cycle model used in both cases is sequential. A sequential model is defined
by INCOSE [52] as a systematic approach for the system development process where the
system goes through a sequence of steps from goals definition to a complete system. This
sequential model is beneficial to use in our cases which are large projects with different
parties involved. However, this model also requires verified traceable requirements [52],
which is challenging to achieve. As we saw in Section 4, the requirements validation may
be overlooked (ch3), and the traceability information is not adequate (ch11), which makes
checking all the requirements difficult (ch13).

5.2. Challenges and potential solutions

The mapping of challenges to solutions was done based on the following: (1) Analysis and
synthesis of the results, as some possible solutions were identified during the interview
process, e.g., feedback during RE process, policy change and tender process. (2) The
authors’ experience in requirements engineering research
    Figure 93 depicts the identified challenges, their causes, and their consequences and shows
the relations between them based on the analysis of the study results and complemented
with references from the literature based on the author’s experience in requirements
engineering research. In addition, we propose solutions areas to tackle these challenges. In
the problem analysis, arrows represent a contributes to relation between the connected
elements. The arrows from the solution area to the problem area indicate whether a solution
potentially addresses the connected cause and consequently the connected challenge(s). We
differentiate between whether the relation originates from:
– our results (solid arrow)
– an observation made in another study (dashed arrow with reference)
– both from our results and from literature (solid arrow with reference)

   3
       We will make the citations in the figure consistent with the citation in the paper before publishing.   19
     Abdeen et al.                                                                                     e-Informatica Software Engineering Journal, 19 (2025), 250107


                                                                                                                Solution Area       Problem Analysis
                                                      (Maro et al. 2018,
                                                  Clelan-huang et al. 2010)                        (Maro et al. 2018)
                                                                               Traced artifacts
                                        Auxiliary artifact                                                             Requirements
                                                                                have different
                                          for tracing                                                                traced to models
                                                                              abstraction levels
                               C/S                                                                                                                                                          Uncertainty in the
                                                                                                                              Ch 11: Granularity of                                        verification process
                                                                (Spinellis et al. 1999,
                                                                                                                                     traces
                                                                 Feather et al. 2003,
                                                                  Letier et al. 2014)
                                         Requirements                                 Absence of risk                                            Ch 13: Verifying all           (INCOSE 2015,
                                          risk analysis                                  analysis                                                  requirements                Damm et al .2006)

                                C                                                                                                                                                              Undetected
                                                                     (Lauesen                                (Raatikainen                                                                  errors that are costly
                                                                                                                                 Ch 6: Requirements
                                                                       2002)                                  et al. 2011)                                                                      to fix later
                                               Project                                    Many parties                        elicitation and validation
                                              glossaries                                   involved                               with non-technical
                                                                         (Lauesen                                                    stakeholders
                                C                                          2002)
                                                                                           Lack of local
                                              Knowledge                                                                       Ch 5: Finding the correct
                                                                                          experience of
                                             organization         (Binding and                                                       information                              Extra cost
                                                                                          design team
     RE




                               C/S                               Douglas 2004,
                                                                 Garshol 2004)
                                                                                                                              Ch3: Miss interpretation
                                                                                                                                                                                               Extra work
                                                                (Gorschek                                                        of requirements
                                                                   and
                                                                  Wohlin                                 (Fernández          (Fernández
                                        Requirements              2006)         Lack of experience                           et al. 2017)
                                                                                                         et al. 2017)
                                         abstraction                               of RE team
                                         approaches                                                                     Ch 7: Requirements                       Ch 8: Requirements are
                                                                                                                            abstraction                            impossible to build
                                C
                                                            Zhao et al. 2022,
                                                               Silva 2015                                                               (Felderer et al. 2013,
                                                                                    Resources                                             Atoum et al. 2021)
                                             NLP4RE                                                          Ch 1: Prioritizing the
                                                                                                                                                                 Ch 2: Identify conflicts
                                                                                                           requirements validation
                                                               Prado et al. 2004                                                                                          early
                               C/S                                                                                  process
                                                                                   Too many
                                                                                 ambiguous and
                                         Feedback
                                                                                 conflicting reqs
                                           during             (SEBoK 2022,
                                         RE process         Cao and Ramesh
                                                                 2008)
                               C/S

                                                                              Many models                            Ch 12: Lack of experience            Ch 10: Requirements tool
     Outside the scope of RE




                                        Policy change                                                                                                                                                Extra work
                                                                               types used                                   using tools                            related
                                C
                                                                                                              Ch 4: Long time to
                                                                               Long       (Tam et al. 2010)
                                                                                                                communicate
                                        Tender process                      communication
                                                                                                            requirements (changes
                                                                               chain
                                C                                                                               and questions)
                                                                                                                           Ch 9: Difficulty
                                        Translation tool                         Language                                understanding BIM                                                        Extra time spent
                                                                                                                           requirements
                                S


                Key                                                                                                                                                                         [X]              [X]
                                                                                                                                            Solution
                                                                                                                                             Scope




                                                 Solution             Cause          Cause from          Challenge        Consequence                                   Relation from Relation from Relation from the
                                                                                      literature                                                                         the results    literature results and literature
                               Responsible




                                     Figure 9. Relationship between challenges, the abbreviation (ch) refers to challenge


         The solution areas proposed in this section are not exhaustive for all possible solutions
     for the challenges and their causes. Rather, they are potential solutions where their
     effectiveness in addressing the challenges has been reported in literature but still needs to
     be verified in the particular context we have studied. Furthermore, we elaborate on where
     a solution could be implemented, at the client or the supplier side, by indicating the main
     responsible party. We present the solution areas in more detail next.
     Auxiliary artifacts in tracing When tracing requirements to downstream artifacts in
     software (e.g., test cases) and system (e.g., design models) projects, an auxiliary artifact
     could be used to address the different abstraction levels of the traced artifacts. Thus, the
     auxiliary artifact should be traceable to artifacts with different abstraction levels. It can be
     an artifact that is produced during the project execution, e.g., a lower level requirement [57],
20   or an external artifact that is not part of the software or system, e.g., a domain ontology
Abdeen et al.                         e-Informatica Software Engineering Journal, 19 (2025), 250107


containing domain concepts and has a hierarchical structure [58]. Using an auxiliary artifact
solves the abstraction level mismatch between requirements and the downstream artifacts
(e.g., test cases or design models), and consequently could address the granularity of traces
challenge (ch11). Fine-grained trace links make it possible to trace requirements to their
implementation; thus, verifying all requirements (ch13) in the design model can be more
feasible. This solution should be implemented by the client (for the requirements) and by
the supplier (for the delivered artifact).
Requirements risk analysis A risk analysis could be conducted on all requirements to
assess the severity and consequences of failing to fulfill a requirement. A requirements-risk
analysis is usually conducted in a similar way as those done for a project plan. In the
requirements-risk analysis, three main concepts are identified: problematic requirements,
the possible failures, and activities that could prevent or mitigate these risks [59]. The
risk analysis results help engineers in decision-making by reducing uncertainty [60]. Such
decisions are where resources should be spent [59] or which requirements should be
prioritized for verification [61]. The client should be responsible for introducing requirements
risk analysis as part of the RE process to ensure that the project adheres to the requirements
that threaten the project success.
Project glossaries Project glossaries consist of a set of terms and their descriptions in
a specific domain or a project. Project glossaries are used to mitigate misinterpretations
of terms (ch3) by project members with different backgrounds [62]. Implementing project
glossaries can address differences in experience of design teams align terminology between
parties with different backgrounds involved during requirements elicitation (ch6).
    Project glossaries address these issues by providing an explicit description of terms that
can be misunderstood. Delisle and Olson investigate whether project-based terminology
and definitions are actually as widely accepted as believed and conclude that more effort
should be dedicated towards coordination of glossaries and dissemination of information
about project management terms and definitions [63]. We speculate that a broader adoption
of glossaries can be supported by automated construction of project glossaries [64, 65]. In
our case, the client specifies the project requirements, so it is his responsibility to develop
and maintain the project glossary.
Knowledge organization Knowledge organization is the process of indexing, classifying,
and archiving documents and books to ease access to them [66]. McClory et al. stressed the
importance of knowledge management and organisational learning and suggested triple-loop
learning as an organisational structure [67].
    Infrastructure projects contain many documents (e.g., rules and regulations) that need
to be structured and organized to be useful for requirements extraction and analysis.
Garshol [68] identified different types of knowledge organization systems, e.g., controlled
vocabularies and taxonomies. The use of an appropriate knowledge organization system
to structure domain knowledge [69] could allow engineers to find information about local
projects more efficiently and effectively (ch5). This solution could be introduced either by
the client or the supplier. The client owns the rules and regulations, and organizing them
through automated classification makes access to information more efficient. The supplier
could be obligated to adhere to international standards which apply to multiple projects.
Requirements abstraction methods First, one of the causes of the major challenges
in requirements engineering is the existence of too abstract requirements, which could
result in miss interpretation (ch3) [70]. Thus, a requirement should not be too abstract or
unambiguous [71]. Second, according to SWEBOK, a requirement is defined as “a property                21
     Abdeen et al.                         e-Informatica Software Engineering Journal, 19 (2025), 250107


     that must be exhibited by something in order to solve some problem in the real world” and
     a good SRS should be an agreement between the client and supplier about “what the software
     product is to do”, not how to do it [71]. Thus, a requirement should not restrict possible
     solutions or be impossible to be realized (ch8). We argue that requirement abstraction
     methods should be applied to ensure requirements are written on an appropriate abstraction
     level. Gorschek and Wohlin [72] have developed the Requirements Abstraction Model
     (RAM), a method to systematically specify requirements on multiple levels of abstraction
     (from product to component level). RAM has been shown to improve the requirements
     engineering process and the quality of the requirements specified in practice [73]. Liebel et
     al. suggested coordinating requirements on various abstraction to avoid communication
     and coordination breakpoints [30]. Requirements engineers on the client side should adopt
     one of these solutions as part of the RE process.
     NLP4RE Natural language processing (NLP) is the use of (semi-)automated techniques to
     analyze and model human language [74], mainly through employing machine learning. This
     is particularly beneficial as the majority of requirements in software and system projects
     are specified in natural language [75, 76]. NLP approaches have shown their potential to
     support the requirements validation process as presented by Zhao et al. [77] in their review
     of the literature on NLP for requirements engineering (NLP4RE). The use of NLP4RE
     reduces the number of resources required for the requirements validation [77, 78], e.g.,
     by performing automated model checking. Moreover, NLP4RE supports requirements
     engineers in identifying conflicts and ambiguities (ch2), which requires expertise [79]. Both
     the client and supplier could benefit from adopting this solution in the RE process.
     Feedback during RE process One of the good practices in system engineering [48]
     and software engineering [80] during the requirements engineering process is adopting an
     iterative approach, where the client and supplier agree on the requirements to be developed
     incrementally. This approach increases the understanding of requirements and helps with
     their prioritization [81]. In Case Two, an iterative approach for RE is adopted where the
     client and the contractor (i.e., supplier) negotiate the requirements before they are stored
     in a requirements management tool (Figure 6). However, in Case One, the requirements
     were specified and communicated up-front, and changes were difficult to introduce due to
     contractual obligations. Adopting an iterative approach when specifying the requirements
     where the feedback of the supplier is considered reduces ambiguity and conflict in the
     specified requirements. Both the client and the supplier are responsible for implementing
     this solution.
     Outside the scope of RE Other challenges (4,9,10,12) and solutions areas are outside
     the scope of RE but in the area of project management. A change in companies’ policy
     (client), an improved tender process (client), and using better tools are required in order
     to tackle these challenges.

     5.3. Impact on academia and industry

     This study illustrates the persistence of challenges related to requirements. Since existing
     solutions may not be effective, a root-cause analysis should be conducted to identify
     the causes behind these challenges and find solutions to address them. Furthermore, the
     requirements process and identified challenges in infrastructure projects are similar to those
     in the software engineering domain. Thus, although they are two distinct domains, they
22   share many similarities when it comes to requirement engineering. The software and system
Abdeen et al.                         e-Informatica Software Engineering Journal, 19 (2025), 250107


engineering domain researchers should learn from each other’s experiences in investigating
requirements engineering processes and addressing challenges related to them.
    When researchers and practitioners are looking for a solution to specific challenges in
one domain, they should explore existing solutions in the other. The challenges that we
identified in this study and their mapping to potential solutions, as we presented in this
section, illustrate the similarity between the system and software engineering domain. Both
domains use natural language to specify requirements, and both have digital assets that
need to be verified against the specified requirements. In the software domain, engineers
produce digital artifacts such as design documents and source code, while in the system
domain, engineers produce design models (digital twins of the system) before building
the physical build. Moreover, adopting requirements communication techniques is highly
important for the system domain in general and the infrastructure domain in particular,
due to the sub-contracted work being the norm, which adds more complexity to the
requirements communication process.

5.4. Threats to validity

We use the framework by Runesson et al. [46] to discuss the validity threats of our study.
The framework lists four categories of case study validity: construct, internal, external, and
reliability. We analyzed the validity threats of our study from the beginning of our study,
and we continued to revise these threats to minimize them.
Construct validity We mitigated threats to design and execution by involving more than
one researcher in designing and conducting the study. The involved researchers reviewed the
research questions and the case study protocol. Feedback sessions were conducted to discuss
the protocol and make improvements. For example, the first author wrote a set of interview
questions per studied process. During a feedback session, the third author suggested that
the questions should be adapted to each interviewee’s role. On that premise, the interview
questions were adapted to each role by the first author, and the other researchers reviewed
them. The improvement of the interview questions for each interview was done by the
researchers before the start of said interview.
Internal validity Although the involved researchers revised and improved the case study
protocol, there might be a bias or errors in the collected data. To reduce the risk of bias
in data collection, between two and three researchers were present during each interview.
One researcher led the interview, and the other researchers observed the interview and
asked follow-up questions if necessary. In addition, after an interview was completed, we
transcribed the interview, a second researcher verified the transcript and finally sent it out
to the interviewee for comments.
    Another internal threat to validity is the risk of bias when coding the transcripts as
part of the data analysis phase. We mitigate this threat by assigning the coding task to
one researcher and the verification of those codes to another. Eventual disagreements were
resolved in meetings.
External validity It could be argued that generalization would be difficult with two case
studies and that more case studies may be required to increase the validity of the study
and achieve generalization. However, generalization can be achieved by individual cases. It
is a matter of the selected cases. As argued by Flyvbjerg, one of the five misunderstandings
of a case study is the inability to generalize from a single case [82]. We focus on analytical
generalization rather than statistical generalization by providing detailed case descriptions         23
     Abdeen et al.                         e-Informatica Software Engineering Journal, 19 (2025), 250107


     and discussing the implications of our findings. Moreover, we believe that our cases are
     a good representation of the population (infrastructure projects). They are two large
     infrastructure projects, with large-sized (45 000+ employees) companies involved. Case
     One is in its final stages, while Case Two is in its early stages.
     Reliability To ensure that our study is repeatable, we present in Section 3 the protocol
     of our study. We explain the setup of our studied cases, list the cluster of the interview
     questions, present the steps in which we conducted the interviews, and the coding mechanism
     of the interview data.


     6. Conclusion

     We have conducted two case studies in three companies to explore the requirements valida-
     tion, requirements communication, digital assets verification processes, and the challenges
     associated with these processes between the client and the supplier in infrastructure projects.
     We identified 13 challenges and proposed potential solutions from the literature to address
     these challenges. Many of the challenges faced, during the forward communication (tender
     documents) and backward communication (project deliverables), between the client and
     supplier can be addressed in the area of requirements engineering. Furthermore, the solution
     for similar challenges in the software domain can potentially address the challenges observed
     in the system domain.
         The system requirements play a main role in the communication between the client
     and supplier in infrastructure projects, and their quality likely affects subsequent processes,
     e.g., verification and acceptance. The verification process is a difficult task in projects on
     this large scale, with thousands of requirements and models to validate. One particular
     difficulty is keeping track of the requirements during the verification process.


     7. Future work

     We have identified several future work directions based on the finding from this paper, that
     we outline below:
     – Exploring methods to introduce early requirements risk analysis and how to estimate
        potential risks on early and often incomplete requirements and how to enable risk-based
        requirements reasoning [59].
     – Exploring auxiliary artifacts and their usage scenario in requirements traceability. This
        involves exploring the relationship between the structural characteristics of auxiliary
        artifacts (e.g., a taxonomy) and the performance of machine learning models for
        requirements traceability.
     – Investigating what types of knowledge organization systems are the most suitable
        for large-scale infrastructure projects – we believe that project glossaries should be
        considered as an efficient way of organizing knowledge and building common vocabulary
        between the parties. We also plan to explore the suitability of topic maps knowledge
        organizational structure for infrastructure projects [68].
     – Investigating the suitability of requirements abstraction models from the software
        domain (e.g., RAM [73]) for the infrastructure projects.
     – Exploring the use of NLP4RE techniques to detect conflicts and ambiguity in functional
24      requirements from the infrastructure domain.
Abdeen et al.                           e-Informatica Software Engineering Journal, 19 (2025), 250107


CRediT authorship contribution statement

Waleed Abdeen: conceptualization, methodology, formal analysis, investigation, and writing
– original draft. Krzysztof Wnuk: conceptualization, methodology, investigation, supervision,
and writing – review and editing. Michael Unterkalmsteiner: conceptualization, methodology,
formal analysis and investigation, supervision, project administration, funding acquisition,
and writing – review and editing. Alexandros Chirtoglou: conceptualization, formal analysis
and writing – review and editing.



Declaration of competing interest

The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.



Funding

This research was performed within DCAT Project, funded by Trafikverket, Sweden.


References

 [1] H. Hofmann and F. Lehner, “Requirements engineering as a success factor in software projects,”
     IEEE Software, Vol. 18, No. 4, Jul. 2001, pp. 58–66.
 [2] E. Bjarnason, K. Wnuk, and B. Regnell, “Requirements are slipping through the gaps – A
     case study on causes and effects of communication gaps in large-scale software development,”
     in IEEE 19th international requirements engineering conference. IEEE, 2011, pp. 37–46.
 [3] O. Liskin, “How artifacts support and impede requirements communication,” in Requirements
     Engineering: Foundation for Software Quality: 21st International Working Conference. Springer,
     2015, pp. 132–147.
 [4] P. Brereton, “The software customer/supplier relationship,” Commun. ACM, Vol. 47, No. 2,
     Feb. 2004, p. 77–81.
 [5] C. Ebert, “Optimizing supplier management in global software engineering,” in International
     Conference on Global Software Engineering (ICGSE), 2007, pp. 177–185.
 [6] T. Vullinghs, T. Gantner, S. Steinhauer, and T. Weber, “Experiences on lean techniques
     to manage software suppliers,” in Product Focused Software Process Improvement: Second
     International Conference, PROFES 2000, Oulu, Finland, June 20-22, 2000. Proceedings 2.
     Springer, 2000, pp. 244–256.
 [7] Y. Zheng, S. Liu, W. Huang, and J.J.Y. Jiang, “Inter-organizational cooperation in automotive
     new product development projects,” Industrial Management and Data Systems, Vol. 120, No. 1,
     2020, pp. 79–97.
 [8] J.J. Jiang, G. Klein, J.C.A. Tsai, and Y. Li, “Managing multiple-supplier project teams in new
     software development,” International Journal of Project Management, Vol. 36, No. 7, 2018,
     pp. 925–939. [Online]. https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S026378631830125X
 [9] A. Butt, M. Naaranoja, and J. Savolainen, “Project change stakeholder communication,”
     International Journal of Project Management, Vol. 34, No. 8, 2016, pp. 1579–1595.
[10] G. Wu, C. Liu, X. Zhao, and J. Zuo, “Investigating the relationship between communication-
     conflict interaction and project success among construction project teams,” International
     Journal of Project Management, Vol. 35, No. 8, 2017, pp. 1466–1482.                                25
     Abdeen et al.                           e-Informatica Software Engineering Journal, 19 (2025), 250107


     [11] Y.F. Badir, B. Büchel, and C.L. Tucci, “A conceptual framework of the impact of NPD project
          team and leader empowerment on communication and performance: An alliance case context,”
          International Journal of Project Management, Vol. 30, No. 8, 2012, pp. 914–926.
     [12] H.Ç. Demirel, W. Leendertse, L. Volker, and M. Hertogh, “Flexibility in PPP contracts –
          Dealing with potential change in the pre-contract phase of a construction project,” Construction
          management and economics, Vol. 35, No. 4, 2017, pp. 196–206.
     [13] A.D. Songer and K.R. Molenaar, “Project characteristics for successful public-sector design-
          build,” Journal of construction engineering and management, Vol. 123, No. 1, 1997, pp. 34–40.
     [14] C.W. Ibbs, Y.H. Kwak, T. Ng, and A.M. Odabasi, “Project delivery systems and project
          change: Quantitative analysis,” Journal of construction engineering and management, Vol. 129,
          No. 4, 2003, pp. 382–387.
     [15] E. Kania, E. Radziszewska-Zielina, and G. Śladowski, “Communication and information flow
          in Polish construction projects,” Sustainability, Vol. 12, No. 21, 2020, p. 9182.
     [16] Z.Y. Zhao, Q.L. Lv, J. Zuo, and G. Zillante, “Prediction system for change management in
          construction project,” Journal of Construction Engineering and Management, Vol. 136, No. 6,
          2010, pp. 659–669.
     [17] S. Malik, M. Taqi, J.M. Martins, M.N. Mata, J.M. Pereira et al., “Exploring the relationship
          between communication and success of construction projects: The mediating role of conflict,”
          Sustainability, Vol. 13, No. 8, 2021, p. 4513.
     [18] S.D. Vermillion and R.J. Malak, “An investigation on requirement and objective alloca-
          tion strategies using a principal-agent model,” Systems Engineering, Vol. 23, No. 1, 2020,
          pp. 100–117.
     [19] R. Makkinga, R.d. Graaf, and H. Voordijk, “Successful verification of subcontracted work in
          the construction industry,” Systems Engineering, Vol. 21, No. 2, 2018, pp. 131–140.
     [20] A.M. Madni and M. Sievers, “Systems integration: Key perspectives, experiences, and chal-
          lenges,” Systems Engineering, Vol. 17, No. 1, 2014, pp. 37–51.
     [21] J. Xu, H. Smyth, and V. Zerjav, “Towards the dynamics of trust in the relationship between
          project-based firms and suppliers,” International Journal of Project Management, Vol. 39,
          No. 1, 2021, pp. 32–44.
     [22] L.S. Henderson, “Encoding and decoding communication competencies in project management
          – An exploratory study,” International Journal of Project Management, Vol. 22, No. 6, 2004,
          pp. 469–476.
     [23] M. Loosemore and H. Muslmani, “Construction project management in the Persian Gulf:
          Inter-cultural communication,” International Journal of Project Management, Vol. 17, No. 2,
          1999, pp. 95–100.
     [24] C. Semeraro, M. Lezoche, H. Panetto, and M. Dassisti, “Digital twin paradigm: A systematic
          literature review,” Computers in Industry, Vol. 130, 2021, p. 103469.
     [25] A. Toygar, “A new asset type: Digital assets,” Journal of International Technology and
          Information Management, Vol. 22, No. 4, 2013, p. 9.
     [26] P.E.D. Love, J. Zhou, J. Matthews, and H. Luo, “Systems information modelling: Enabling
          digital asset management,” Advances in Engineering Software, Vol. 102, 2016, pp. 155–165.
     [27] A.R. Hevner, S.T. March, J. Park, and S. Ram, “Design science in information systems
          research,” MIS quarterly, 2004, pp. 75–105.
     [28] R.J. Wieringa, Design science methodology for information systems and software engineering.
          Springer, 2014.
     [29] E. Bjarnason, B. Gislason Bern, and L. Svedberg, “Inter-team communication in large-scale
          co-located software engineering: A case study,” Empirical Software Engineering, Vol. 27, No. 2,
          2022, p. 36.
     [30] G. Liebel, M. Tichy, E. Knauss, O. Ljungkrantz, and G. Stieglbauer, “Organisation and
          communication problems in automotive requirements engineering,” Requirements Engineering,
          Vol. 23, 2018, pp. 145–167.
     [31] J. Iqbal, R. Ahmad, M.H.N.B.M. Nasir, and M.A. Noor, “A framework to address communica-
          tion issues during requirements engineering process for software development outsourcing,”
26        Journal of Internet Technology, Vol. 19, No. 3, 2018, pp. 845–859.
Abdeen et al.                           e-Informatica Software Engineering Journal, 19 (2025), 250107


[32] S. Fricker, T. Gorschek, C. Byman, and A. Schmidle, “Handshaking: Negotiate to provoke the
     right understanding of requirements,” IEEE Software, Vol. 99, 2009.
[33] J. Pernstål, T. Gorschek, R. Feldt, and D. Florén, “Requirements communication and balancing
     in large-scale software-intensive product development,” Information and Software Technology,
     Vol. 67, 2015, pp. 44–64.
[34] S. Maalem and N. Zarour, “Challenge of validation in requirements engineering,” Journal of
     Innovation in Digital Ecosystems, Vol. 3, No. 1, 2016, pp. 15–21.
[35] T.F. Lynghaug, S. Kokkula, and G. Muller, “Investigating systems engineering approaches in
     the norwegian construction industry: A multi-case study,” INCOSE International Symposium,
     Vol. 32, No. 1, 2022, pp. 792–808.
[36] R. de Graaf, R. Pater, and H. Voordijk, “Level of sub-contracting design responsibilities in
     design and construct civil engineering bridge projects,” Frontiers in Engineering and Built
     Environment, Vol. 3, No. 3, 2023, pp. 192–205, publisher: Emerald Publishing Limited.
[37] M. Raatikainen, T. Männistö, T. Tommila, and J. Valkonen, “Challenges of requirements
     engineering – A case study in nuclear energy domain,” in IEEE 19th International Requirements
     Engineering Conference. IEEE, 2011, pp. 253–258.
[38] D. Saxena and J. McDonagh, “Communication breakdowns during business process change
     projects – Insights from a sociotechnical case study,” International Journal of Project Manage-
     ment, Vol. 40, No. 3, 2022, pp. 181–191.
[39] E. Ochieng and A. Price, “Managing cross-cultural communication in multicultural construction
     project teams: The case of Kenya and UK,” International Journal of Project Management,
     Vol. 28, No. 5, 2010, pp. 449–460.
[40] T.U. Daim, A. Ha, S. Reutiman, B. Hughes, U. Pathak et al., “Exploring the communication
     breakdown in global virtual teams,” International Journal of Project Management, Vol. 30,
     No. 2, 2012, pp. 199–212.
[41] L.S. Henderson, R.W. Stackman, and R. Lindekilde, “The centrality of communication norm
     alignment, role clarity, and trust in global project teams,” International Journal of Project
     Management, Vol. 34, No. 8, 2016, pp. 1717–1730.
[42] A. Terry Bahill and S.J. Henderson, “Requirements development, verification, and validation
     exhibited in famous failures,” Systems engineering, Vol. 8, No. 1, 2005, pp. 1–14.
[43] E. Bjarnason, P. Runeson, M. Borg, M. Unterkalmsteiner, E. Engström et al., “Challenges
     and practices in aligning requirements with verification and validation: a case study of six
     companies,” Empirical software engineering, Vol. 19, No. 6, 2014, pp. 1809–1855.
[44] S. Hotomski, E.B. Charrada, and M. Glinz, “An exploratory study on handling requirements
     and acceptance test documentation in industry,” in IEEE 24th International Requirements
     Engineering Conference (RE), 2016, pp. 116–125, ISSN: 2332-6441.
[45] A.R. Hevner, “A three cycle view of design science research,” Scandinavian journal of infor-
     mation systems, Vol. 19, No. 2, 2007, p. 4.
[46] P. Runeson and M. Höst, “Guidelines for conducting and reporting case study research in
     software engineering,” Empirical software engineering, Vol. 14, No. 2, 2009, p. 131.
[47] P. Grünbacher and N. Seyff, “Requirements Negotiation,” in Engineering and Managing
     Software Requirements, A. Aurum and C. Wohlin, Eds. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer, 2005,
     pp. 143–162.
[48] SEBoK, “Stakeholder needs and requirements – SEBoK,” 2020, [Online; accessed
     15-February-2021].
[49] G. Brataas, G.K. Hanssen, X. Qiu, and L.S. Græslie, “Requirements engineering in the market
     dialogue phase of public procurement: A case study of an innovation partnership for medical
     technology,” in Requirements Engineering: Foundation for Software Quality, V. Gervasi and
     A. Vogelsang, Eds. Cham: Springer International Publishing, 2022, pp. 159–174.
[50] C.E. Moe, M. Newman, and M.K. Sein, “The public procurement of information systems:
     dialectics in requirements specification,” European Journal of Information Systems, Vol. 26,
     No. 2, 2017, pp. 143–163.

                                                                                                        27
     Abdeen et al.                           e-Informatica Software Engineering Journal, 19 (2025), 250107


     [51] D. Damian, R. Helms, I. Kwan, S. Marczak, and B. Koelewijn, “The role of domain knowledge
          and cross-functional communication in socio-technical coordination,” in 35th International
          Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE). IEEE, 2013, pp. 442–451.
     [52] D.D. Walden and INCOSE, Eds., INCOSE Systems Engineering Handbook: A Guide for System
          Life Cycle Processes and Activities. New York: John Wiley and Sons, Incorporated, 2015.
     [53] L.O. Damm, L. Lundberg, and C. Wohlin, “Faults-slip-through—a concept for measuring the
          efficiency of the test process,” Software Process: Improvement and Practice, Vol. 11, No. 1,
          2006, pp. 47–59.
     [54] I. Atoum, M.K. Baklizi, I. Alsmadi, A.A. Otoom, T. Alhersh et al., “Challenges of software
          requirements quality assurance and validation: A systematic literature review,” IEEE Access,
          Vol. 9, 2021, pp. 137 613–137 634.
     [55] M. Felderer and A. Beer, “Using defect taxonomies for requirements validation in industrial
          projects,” in 2013 21st IEEE International Requirements Engineering Conference (RE). IEEE,
          2013, pp. 296–301.
     [56] V.W.Y. Tam, L.Y. Shen, and J.S.Y. Kong, “Impacts of multi-layer chain subcontracting on
          project management performance,” International Journal of Project Management, Vol. 29,
          No. 1, 2011, pp. 108–116.
     [57] S. Maro, J.P. Steghöfer, and M. Staron, “Software traceability in the automotive domain:
          Challenges and solutions,” Journal of Systems and Software, Vol. 141, 2018, pp. 85–110.
     [58] J. Cleland-Huang, A. Czauderna, M. Gibiec, and J. Emenecker, “A machine learning ap-
          proach for tracing regulatory codes to product specific requirements,” in Proceedings of the
          32nd ACM/IEEE International Conference on Software Engineering – Volume 1, ICSE ’10.
          Association for Computing Machinery, 2010, pp. 155–164.
     [59] M.S. Feather and S.L. Cornford, “Quantitative risk-based requirements reasoning,” Require-
          ments Engineering, Vol. 8, No. 4, 2003, pp. 248–265.
     [60] E. Letier, D. Stefan, and E.T. Barr, “Uncertainty, risk, and information value in software
          requirements and architecture,” in Proceedings of the 36th International Conference on Software
          Engineering, ICSE 2014. Association for Computing Machinery, 2014, pp. 883–894.
     [61] D. Spinellis, S. Kokolakis, and S. Gritzalis, “Security requirements, risks and recommendations
          for small enterprise and home‐office environments,” Information Management and Computer
          Security, Vol. 7, No. 3, 1999, pp. 121–128, publisher: MCB UP Ltd.
     [62] S. Lauesen, Software Requirements: Styles and Techniques. Pearson Education, 2002.
     [63] C.L. Delisle and D. Olson, “Would the real project management language please stand up?”
          International Journal of Project Management, Vol. 22, No. 4, 2004, pp. 327–337.
     [64] C. Arora, M. Sabetzadeh, L. Briand, and F. Zimmer, “Automated extraction and clustering of
          requirements glossary terms,” IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering, Vol. 43, No. 10,
          2017, pp. 918–945.
     [65] C. Wang, X. Peng, M. Liu, Z. Xing, X. Bai et al., “A learning-based approach for automatic
          construction of domain glossary from source code and documentation,” in Proceedings of the
          27th ACM Joint Meeting on European Software Engineering Conference and Symposium on the
          Foundations of Software Engineering, ESEC/FSE 2019. Association for Computing Machinery,
          2019, pp. 97–108.
     [66] B. Hjørland, “What is knowledge organization (KO)?” KO Knowledge Organization, Vol. 35,
          No. 2-3, 2008, pp. 86–101.
     [67] S. McClory, M. Read, and A. Labib, “Conceptualising the lessons-learned process in project
          management: Towards a triple-loop learning framework,” International Journal of Project
          Management, Vol. 35, No. 7, 2017, pp. 1322–1335, social Responsibilities for the Management
          of Megaprojects.
     [68] L.M. Garshol, “Metadata? Thesauri? Taxonomies? Topic maps! Making sense of it all,” Journal
          of Information Science, Vol. 30, No. 4, 2004, pp. 378–391, publisher: SAGE Publications Ltd.
     [69] C. Binding and D. Tudhope, “KOS at your service: Programmatic access to knowledge
          organisation systems,” Journal of Digital Information, 2004.

28
Abdeen et al.                           e-Informatica Software Engineering Journal, 19 (2025), 250107


[70] D.M. Fernández, S. Wagner, M. Kalinowski, M. Felderer, P. Mafra et al., “Naming the pain in
     requirements engineering: Contemporary problems, causes, and effects in practice,” Empirical
     software engineering, Vol. 22, 2017, pp. 2298–2338.
[71] IEEE Recommended Practice for Software Requirements Specifications, IEEE Std. 830-1998,
     10 1998.
[72] T. Gorschek and C. Wohlin, “Requirements abstraction model,” Requirements Engineering,
     Vol. 11, No. 1, 2006, pp. 79–101.
[73] T. Gorschek, P. Garre, S.B.M. Larsson, and C. Wohlin, “Industry evaluation of the requirements
     abstraction model,” Requirements Engineering, Vol. 12, No. 3, 2007, pp. 163–190.
[74] J. Hirschberg and C.D. Manning, “Advances in natural language processing,” Science, Vol. 349,
     No. 6245, 2015, pp. 261–266, publisher: American Association for the Advancement of Science.
[75] M. Kassab, C. Neill, and P. Laplante, “State of practice in requirements engineering: Con-
     temporary data,” Innovations in Systems and Software Engineering, Vol. 10, No. 4, 2014,
     pp. 235–241.
[76] S. Wagner, D.M. Fernández, M. Felderer, A. Vetrò, M. Kalinowski et al., “Status quo in
     requirements engineering: A theory and a global family of surveys,” ACM Transactions on
     Software Engineering and Methodology (TOSEM), Vol. 28, No. 2, 2019, pp. 1–48.
[77] L. Zhao, W. Alhoshan, A. Ferrari, K.J. Letsholo, M.A. Ajagbe et al., “Natural language
     processing for requirements engineering: A systematic mapping study,” ACM Computing
     Surveys, Vol. 54, No. 3, 2022, pp. 1–41.
[78] A.R. da Silva, “SpecQua: Towards a framework for requirements specifications with increased
     quality,” in Enterprise Information Systems, Lecture Notes in Business Information Processing,
     J. Cordeiro, S. Hammoudi, L. Maciaszek, O. Camp, and J. Filipe, Eds. Springer International
     Publishing, 2015, pp. 265–281.
[79] F.A.C. Pinheiro, Perspectives on Software Requirements. Boston, MA: Springer US, 2004,
     Ch. Requirements Traceability, pp. 91–113.
[80] B. Ramesh, L. Cao, and R. Baskerville, “Agile requirements engineering practices and challenges:
     An empirical study,” Information Systems Journal, Vol. 20, No. 5, 2010, pp. 449–480.
[81] L. Cao and B. Ramesh, “Agile requirements engineering practices: An empirical study,” IEEE
     Software, Vol. 25, No. 1, 2008, pp. 60–67.
[82] B. Flyvbjerg, “Five misunderstandings about case-study research,” Qualitative Inquiry, Vol. 12,
     No. 2, 2006, pp. 219–245, publisher: SAGE Publications Inc.


Authors and affiliations
Waleed Abdeen                                     Krzysztof Wnuk
e-mail: waleed.abdeen@bth.se                      e-mail: krzysztof.wnuk@bth.se
ORCID: https://orcid.org/0000-0001-8142-9631      ORCID: https://orcid.org/0000-0003-3567-9300
Software Engineering, BTH, Sweden                 Software Engineering, BTH, Sweden


Michael Unterkalmsteiner                          Alexandros Chirtoglou
e-mail: michael.unterkalmsteiner@bth.se           e-mail: alexandros.chirtoglou@hochtief.de
ORCID: https://orcid.org/0000-0003-4118-0952      HOCHTIEF ViCon GmbH, Germany
Software Engineering, BTH, Sweden




                                                                                                        29
