Abstract
Background: With the growing advances in the digital world, software development demands are increasing at an exponential rate. To ensure reliability of the software, high-performance tools for bug report analysis are needed.
Aim: This paper proposes a new "Iterative Software Reliability" model based on one of the most recent Software Development Life Cycle (SDLC) approach.
Method: The proposed iterative failure rate model assumes that new functionality enhancement occurs in each iteration of software development and accordingly design modification is made at each stage of software development. In terms of defects, testing effort, and added functionality, these changing needs in each iteration are reflected in the proposed model using iterative factors. The proposed model has been tested on twelve Eclipse and six JDT software failure datasets. Proposed model parameters have been estimated using a hybrid swarm - evolutionary algorithm.
Results: The proposed model has about 32% and 55% improved efficiency on Eclipse and JDT datasets, respectively, as compared to other models like Jelinski Moranda Model, Shick-Wolverton Model, Goel Okumotto Imperfect Model, etc.
Conclusion: In each analysis done, the proposed model is found to be reaching acceptable performance and could be applied on other software failure datasets for further validation.
1. Introduction
With the growing advances in cutting-edge innovations in digital world, software develop- ment demand from software industries is increasing exponentially. Due to limited budget, high demand and lack of time, there is a high probability of fault occurrence in the newly developed software, making reliability a concern. The reliability of software is considered as the most crucial quality attribute [1]. At one end, software has made today's life much more comfortable but at other end failures in unreliable software may cause life threatening issues to humans. So unpredictable software failures make life challenging due to the
decreasing reliability of the newly developed systems. Software reliability could be only    1
(c) 2025 The Authors. Published by Wroclaw University of Science and Technology Publishing House. This is an open access article under the CC BY-SA 4.0 license international.
measured using bug report analysis of the software. Using the latest tools and techniques at most care has been taken to develop reliable software, but practically a software developer cannot produce defect-free software [2]. Therefore, there should be a way to avoid software failures to further avoid severe losses to human life or any financial losses in industry. The prerequisite of software developers is to know whether developed software is reliable before they are dispatched to customers. In the competitive arcade of software development, software industries must ensure the reliability of their software to satisfy their customers and make an outlook in the global market [3-5]. As the size and complexity of software grow, so does the number of errors per 1000 lines of code. It becomes more difficult to obtain valuable data for reliability estimation. Software reliability models are only the way to estimate software reliability. Many software reliability estimation models have been developed or proposed in literature, but these developed models have been designed only for specific software applications, works in particular environment and on specific datasets and assumptions of the model. Thus, developing a new software reliability estimation model is a question behind the software developers. There are mainly three reasons that reflect the need to develop a new software reliability model.
- Existing models have been developed only based on traditional software development approaches and do not incorporate the latest SDLC approach [6-10].
- Available research publication has only 31% experimental research, and in this, only 13% pure experimental work has been found [11]. The reason behind this is the narrow failure dataset availability as software companies are not releasing their fault data for public research.
- Existing models are made application-specific, and these can precisely estimate the reliability of application-specific software only. These are not well proving their capac- ity if applied to other applications. The models are further developed based on the Non-homogeneous Poisson Process-based approach [12-23].
Software reliability models are divided into two categories: failure rate-based models and NHPP behavior-based models. The first category of software reliability models used in business and research were failure rate-based models [9]. However, these models need enhancement to incorporate the latest software development methods and estimate soft- ware reliability. Furthermore, more realistic assumptions need to be included in these models to be more suitable in the latest software development environments for reliability estimation. Keeping in mind the need to use the latest software development methods, the authors recommend the iterative method as a top-down refinement approach for software development. The more recent agile method, iterative enhancement method, and spiral method are well-known models supporting the iterative software development process [24, 25]. The authors in this paper propose a failure rate model known as Iterative Software Reliability (ISR) model which incorporates the behavior of these latest software development methods, mainly the iterative SDLC approach [26], for estimating the reliability of big data generating software. There is a necessity to add a factor that will reflect all shifting needs based on the defect analysis in each software development process model [27-29]. Identifying a varying need in each iteration using some factor could be very beneficial for iterative software development inappropriate resource usage. In this paper, varying conditions in each iteration are represented with an iterative factor. The iterative element's value is determined by the iterative parameter, which ranges from 0 to 1 based on the assumption that user acceptability improves with new capabilities in each iteration. The value of an iterative factor is obtained, representing all the requirements that have been
2	changed from the previous iteration in current iteration releases using iterative parameters.
Value of iterative factor increases in some initial iterations because there is an abrupt change in requirements due to many defects found and added functionality in an iteration. Later, when the system has added almost all the functionalities for full implementation of the system, the value of the modulation factor represents that the change in requirements decreases, so its value changes from higher to lower one. When the value of the iterative parameter reaches again near to one, it is assumed that the system is reliable enough and has attained all the vital functionalities to fulfil the end-user needs. Thus, the iterative parameter reflects the level of user acceptance at each phase. Further in the cutting-edge software development environments, using the latest testing techniques, there is always a possibility of removing more than one fault at a time. Fault introduction and removal probabilities are well incorporated in the proposed ISR model development. To the best of authors' knowledge, no studies are available in the literature that includes such factor in the ensemble for reliability estimation via software reliability models. Further, in modeling software, reliability parameter estimation methods play an essential role. However, classical numerical optimization techniques are highly based on constraints, and they may not converge to maxima or minima in multimodal cases [7, 30]. To address non-differential, non-linear, and multimodal problems, new parameter optimization approaches based on nature-inspired optimization algorithms are available [31, 32]. This paper proposes model parameter optimization using a hybrid swarm evolutionary algorithm [33]. This algorithm incorporates the best feature of the artificial bee colony and differential evolution in parameter estimation. Swarm evolutionary algorithm is a new hybrid swarm-evolutionary algorithm for software reliability model parameter estimation is proposed in this paper. This algorithm is centered on the social behavior of artificial bee colonies (Yang 2010a; Abu-Mouti and El-Hawary 2012) and evolutionary behavior of DE algorithm (Storn and Price 1997). Here swarm intelligence of employee bee is enhanced for providing exploitation to provide a better local search of neighborhood positions using evolutionary principle based DE algorithm. Onlooker bee phase has been improved here by incorporating a new factor, showing the fitness probability of the ecological space.
   The proposed ISR model is empirically validated using Eclipse and JDT software failure datasets. Furthermore, the Goodness-of-fit of the proposed work is estimated using Sum of Squared Errors (SSE), Mean Square Error (MSE), Accuracy of Estimate (AE), and Theil Statistics (TS). The proposed ISR model fits the estimation of software reliability under the iterative software development process. Summary of the significant contribution of our work is as follows:
1. Objective 1: To study existing software reliability estimation models and specially failure rate behavior-based models.
2. Objective 2: To propose a new model that considers the behavior of the recently used iterative software development life cycle processes.
3. Objective 3: To validate the proposed model (ISR) on twelve Eclipse common software failure datasets and six JDT software failure dataset iterations.
4. Objective 4: To compare the proposed model with five existing models named Jelinski Moranda Model, Shick-Wolverton Model, Goel Okumotto Imperfect debugging Model, GS Mahapatra and P Roy Model and Modified SW Model.
   Proposed ISR model is found to be supporting software developers and end-users in estimating software reliability at each software development iteration and hence in software systems evolution. The rest of the paper is structured as follows: Section 2 discusses the existing literature in software reliability modelling and various parameter estimation
algorithms used in software reliability model development. Then, in Section 3 proposed    3
software reliability model is discussed. In Section 4, experimental setup and results are discussed. Section 5 discusses the threats to validity and finally Section 6 concludes the paper with future scope.
2. Literature review
A thorough literature has been done by authors which is elaborated in 2 subsections of this section. The first section focusses on development of software reliability models of the software that has been developed using latest software development life cycle processes (SDLC). The next subsection presents a survey of parameter optimization algorithm that is the major requirement for precise software reliability measurement using software reliability models. Already existing parameter optimization algorithms applied on software reliability modeling can only better estimate the reliability of software that has been developed with their specific assumptions and applications.
2.1. Software reliability models and their assumptions
About 300 software reliability models have been developed in the last four decades. The developed models have specific environments, assumptions, and applications [34-40]. Failure rate behavior-based models are used to analyze the program failure rate per fault and study how failure changes at the time of failure in an interval of time. The JM model [8] is the first to estimate software reliability. This behavior-based debugging approach assumes the program initially has a fixed, constant, and unknown number of defects. The duration between failures is considered to be independent and distributed exponentially in these models. Table 1 discusses software reliability models along with their assumptions.
2.2. Parameter optimization processes
Parameter optimization processes play a pivotal role in estimating the reliability of software. Traditional techniques [30, 73, 74] have been found in use for the estimation of parameters of software reliability models. Fatefully, all model parameters usually have non-linear relationships. Because of this, traditional techniques for optimizing parameters suffer various problems in finding the optimum value of models to predict software reliability better. In recent years, meta-heuristic algorithms have become very popular due to their simplicity, flexibility, derivative-free nature, and capability to avoid the local optima problem. These algorithms explore the feasible solution space using some specified rules. Several nature-inspired algorithms have been created in the literature and may be used to address numerical optimization-based issues in various domains [75-83]. Mirjalili [79]
created a hybrid PSOGSA method for mathematical function optimization in 2010 by
combining PSO and PSOGSA. Furthermore, In 2014, Mirjalili [83] presented a binary optimization method based on a hybrid PSOGSA algorithm. Liu and Zhou [84] used a new QPSO (Quantum Particle Swarm Optimization) technique to solve high-dimensional complex issues in 2014. Li et al. [85] proposed ABC-assisted DE for ORPF (Optimal Reactive Power Flow) in 2013. They have used ABC in the DE algorithm to recover the shortcoming of large population requirements to avoid premature convergence. Tiwari et al. [86] presented a hybrid ABC method with DE, which he used to solve welded beam design issues. This method changed the employee bee phase position update equation and utilized DE for the onlooker bee phase position update. Sangeeta et al. [87] have suggested a magnetic navigation-based optimizer to analyze proper software reliability model parameters. Tripathi [88] has used the military Dog algorithm to estimate phone reviews and found it one of the most effective parameter estimation methods available. Sangeeta et al. [89] have created an ecological space-based hybrid swarm evolutionary method for parameter estimation in software reliability models. The authors [90] suggested a firefly-based multi-level picture thresholding method. Khan, Jabeen et al. [91] has proposed a new Metaheuristic algorithm in optimizing deep neural network model for software effort estimation. Kassaymeh et al. [92] has developed a new swarm optimizer for modeling software reliability prediction problems. Authors suggested that proposed algorithm can be applied in various optimization problems. Lakra and Chug [93] has given a study on Application of metaheuristic techniques in software quality prediction. Lilly, Jothi [94] has enhanced software reliability and fault detection process using hybrid brainstorm optimization-based LSTM Model. Kumar and Gopalan [95] have developed an efficient parameter optimization of software reliability growth model by using chaotic grey wolf optimization algorithm. Singh, Kumar et al. [96] has proposed a new Adaptive infinite impulse response system identification using teacher learner-based optimization algorithm and has analyzed good prediction on the basis of proposed algorithm. Rakhi and Pahuja
[97] has developed a method for solving reliability redundancy allocation problem using grey wolf optimization algorithm. Kaushik et al. [98] has discussed about the role of neural networks and metaheuristics in agile software development effort estimation. Yadav N. and Yadav V. [99] proposed a software reliability prediction and optimization approach using machine learning algorithms.
2.3. Insights of the literature survey
From the literature in Table 1 it has been found that failure rate behavior-based models are the earliest models and these are the basis of newly proposed models. These models are studying the program failure rate per fault and are considering only the traditional fixed behavior-based waterfall approach for software development but this is a static and oldest approach. There is a need to propose new model that consider latest method of software development in software reliability analysis on the basis of Bug report analysis. Hybrid algorithms are proving to be effective in a variety of domains. These techniques can be used to estimate the parameters of software reliability models. These swarm evolutionary algorithms are found to be performing good when applied to specific application and dataset. To make their appropriate usage, a new algorithm specific to software reliability application is used in this paper. This research employed a hybrid swarm evolutionary feature-based ABC-DE method for the suggested model parameter estimation. The code for the algorithm
is available in the replication package available at https://zenodo.org/records/13147825.     7
3. Proposed model
Failure rate behavior-based models are the oldest of the software reliability models. These have primarily been used in academics and industry to assess software product reliability. Considering the most recent software development environments and technology, a new model based on the iterative software development cycle process has been proposed. Traditional software development lifecycle methods focus on the models available in the literature. The waterfall software development lifecycle method underpins all existing models. However, modern software development approaches outperform the waterfall software development life cycle methodology. These are life cycle processes that are iterative, spiral, and adaptable. The suggested model uses the most up-to-date software development methods, which are based on the iterative software development approach. The suggested model, which is concerned with the iterative software development process, is developed from a generic collection of failure-rate based models. The proposed Iterative Software Reliability (ISR) model is derived from a general group of failure-rate models and is concerned with the iterative software development process. The failure rate model incorporates changing demands with additional capabilities in each software development iteration using the iterative factor ? that reflects varying requirements in each iteration. The changing needs in each software development iteration include a report of bugs, additional features, and the amount of testing effort. These parameters are used to identify the number of flaws in each iteration that have been either injected or eliminated in each subsequent software development iterations. The modulation factor (?) represents all of these shifting requirements during the software development period. In future iterations, new mistakes or mutually dependent errors may be introduced. With each iteration of the software development life cycle, the suggested model implies that new defects will be inserted with a probability (pi) and removed with (ri) each iteration. As a result, the varied demands in each iteration are unique, and they change according to 1.
3.1. Modified reliability estimation model
3.1.1. Assumptions of proposed model
1. An iteration begins with an undetermined and constant number of software faults.
2. Each of the faults is either mutually dependent or independent, and they may equally cause a failure during testing.
3. The time period between fault occurrences is thought to be independent.
4. The program failure rate is assumed initially to be constant; however, it varies with each iteration at failure times.
5. The failure rate may increase or decrease, depending on the remaining faults in software and the modulation factor.
6. Whenever a failure occurs in an iteration, an immediately debugging effort will be initiated. Each iteration has the fault removal probability, not removed with a probability. Instead, the fault is introduced with a probability. Here, probability.
7. When a fault occurs in iteration, it may not be ideally removed. This may pass in
8	successive iterations because the testing environment of each iteration is different
from the operating environment. Regenerated fault in subsequent iterations introduces imperfect debugging in the proposed model.
The initial iterative faults are fixed and constant but unknown for iteration. Later on, new faults may get injected from the previous iteration, or new faults may get introduced in the current iteration. Based on these faults, developers can change resource allocation in debugging iteration. The Iterative factor represents the modified need for resources and integrates the iterative SDLC process in software reliability modeling. Iterative element defined in Equation (1).
? =   + (1 -  )/ (0 <   = 10)	(1)
Here,   the iterative parameter represents newly added functionality and level of user acceptance in an iteration. Its value is near zero initially and becomes almost one until the final software development iteration.
3.1.2. Model formulation
3.1.3. Parameter estimation
There are three parameters N, n and f, these unknown parameters are measured at different values of ?. MLE function is used to estimate the value of all parameters. The probability density function f (t) for the Proposed Iterative Software Reliability (ISR) model is given in Equation (5).
lts
4.1. Collection of bug data used in experimentation
The proposed ISR model is tested using a bug report taken from the Tera Promise repository. Datasets were preprocessed using various preprocessing techniques like outlier analysis, removal of redundant/missing values, etc. The datasets obtained after preprocessing are available at the repository https://zenodo.org/records/13147825 to encourage replication of the results. The bug report contains a table with bug_id, summary, description, time, associated commit, commit status, and saved files. Dataset is extracted from this file and structured in a required format. The multiple iteration dataset from this bug report is used in this paper to test the capability of proposed model to predict the remaining number of errors, reliability, and failure intensity of the OSS system.
4.2. Results
The proposed ISR model objective is to estimate the precise reliability growth of the software and includes the model parameters N, n, f, ?, p and r. Probability p and r is dependent on the type of project and human skill involved in software testing. Based on these factors, the number of faults removed in testing is assumed to be 96%, and the number of faults introduced is considered as 2%. ? is defined as the new modulation
10   factor showing the changing needs of the iterative software development process. ? values
are calculated using the modulation parameter ( ). The calculated values of ? and   with varying parameters N, n, and f are estimated using the hybrid Artificial Bee Colony and Differential Evolution Algorithm (the code for the used algorithm is available in the replication package; link available at https://zenodo.org/records/13147825) to maximize the log-likelihood function value. Model parameter values are estimated using the MLE technique. 80% of data has been used to estimate parameters. The predicted number of remaining errors, i.e., the expectation, is calculated for each value of modulation factor (?). Goodness-of-fit for the Proposed Iterative Software Reliability (ISR) model is measured using SSE, MSE, AE, and TS for each application dataset [33]. These statistics are used further for comparison between iterations of datasets. Initially, the system is assumed to be having minimum features. Later on, with time, the requirements of the end-users need to be fulfilled; they can add more and more features to the system. These additional changes in upcoming iterations may incorporate some new errors and reduce errors from the earlier iterations. Depending on these new conditions, there is a need to change the iterative system development. Accordingly, the proposed work the parameter changes its shape. In the proposed Iterative Software Reliability (ISR) model, estimated values of represent additional feature changes incorporated in the current iteration, differing from previous ones. For initial iteration releases of Eclipse and JDT open-source software systems, the value should be estimated so that a critical sample of requirements is implemented with the minor features in the system. As time passes and more and more iterations are added with changing functionality in each iteration, the value should fluctuate from lower to higher with the user acceptance and increase in functionality of the system with time. Depending on values, it is estimated for each iteration release, and the model is implemented.
4.3. Result analysis
In this section the analysis of Eclipse software and JDT software failure dataset is done using Proposed model and other failure rate behaviour models. Table 2 shows the failure rate based models used in this research work and Table 3 shows the parameter estimation using Eclipse software failure dataset on various existing models along with the proposed model.
4.3.1. Data analysis of Eclipse software
In the first released iteration of the Eclipse project, the estimated value of ? is 2.2666 and represents that the software has fewer features with the least number of bugs. A new iteration is released, more and more features are added, and value ? reflects all changing requirements incorporated in the next released iteration. The value ? reflects minute changes in minor iteration releases because it involves only a few feature addition and bug fixing. After iteration 2.0, iteration 2.1 has been released with minor feature addition and bug fixing. The value of ? this iteration is 2.8763 in iteration 2.0, but within a minute, it changes in iteration 2.1 ?, takes the value as 2.6343. This value is differing by only a small amount from the value in iteration 2.0. In major iteration release 3.0, the value is ? 3.7891, showing the major change in its value from the 2.1 version. Further in minor releases of iteration 3.0, values ? are changing as 3.2217, 2.5788, 2.3121, 2.7295, 2.6434, and 2.0435 for iteration numbers 3.1, 3.2, 3.3, 3.4, 3.5, and 3.6, respectively. Similarly, in iteration 4.0, the ? parameter's value reflects all major iteration's requirement updates, the value ? is 1.1258, and in its minor iteration release 4.1, the value ? is 1.0009. Using estimated parameter values, prediction of the remaining number of errors is made, remarks are made whether the model overestimates, underestimates, or precisely estimates the number of faults remaining in the system.
Figure 1. The plot of ? versus   for Eclipse dataset
   The Goodness-of-fit of the models is shown in Table 4. From the analysis of results, it is found that the Proposed ISR model is fitted well in terms of SSE, MSE, and AE in iterations 1.0 and 2.1. But GOI model is beating the Proposed Iterative Software Reliability (ISR) model in terms of TS in iteration number 1.0 of the Eclipse software failure dataset. In iteration 2.0 Proposed ISR model is beating other models in terms of SSE and AE but also performing good. SW, and SWM are performing better than the proposed ISR model. In iteration 3.0, the Proposed Iterative Software Reliability (ISR) model performs better than other SSE and MSE, but its AE and TS values are exhausted by other models. In iteration number 3.1 Proposed Iterative Software Reliability (ISR) model is found to be less fitted than other models. Again, in further iterations of 3.2, 3.3, 3.4, 3.5, 3.6, and 4.2, the Proposed ISR) model estimates parameters more precisely than other models. In iteration number 3.3 and 4.1, the Proposed ISR model is not much good than the Mahapatra model in terms of MSE and TS. But they are performing a good fit than other models in terms of SSE, MSE and TS. From all the data analysis done in Table 4, it is found that the Proposed Iterative Software Reliability (ISR) model is performing fighting fit in terms of various Goodness-of-fit criteria and can be used for predicting the reliability of system software.
   Optimal iteration releases can be selected based on reliability. The iterations 3.3, 3.6, and 4.1 are found to have higher reliability, and there are fewer falls in reliability values of these versions than other released iteration reliabilities. All iteration's reliability values
16    are found to be decreasing up to 89%. Failure intensity graphs in Figure 4 show how
much there is a decrease in failure behavior as the number of fault count increases. The iterations 3.3, 3.6, and 4.1 releases have a much-decreasing failure rate. There decrease in failure rate behavior is depicting that with time, the reliability of these systems increases. Reliability analysis has been done in Figure 3 and failure Intensity has been shown in Figure 4. Developers could decide the quality of the released iteration using estimated reliability. This is also helpful for end-users in choosing which iteration release will be most reliable in the future.
4.3.2. Result and data analysis of JDT dataset
In this section, analysis of the JDT software failure dataset is done using the proposed Iterative Software Reliability (ISR) model and other failure rate behavior-based models. Table 5 is showing the estimated values of model parameters.
   A predicted number of errors estimated using the Proposed Iterative Software Reliability (ISR) model is found to be representing accurate estimation when compared with the actual dataset values. There is a slight deviation only because of the poor debugging behavior in the iterative software development process. Remarks are made about whether the model underestimates, overestimates, or precisely estimates the number of remaining errors in the system.
   Figures 5 and 6 are showing ? and   behavior with respect to change in iterations. With each iteration, the value of functionality changes and corresponding to its requirements are made in upcoming iterations. Accordingly value of ?  and changes their shape quantitatively, as shown in Figure 5. Figure 6 is showing the behavior of   with change in iteration numbers. At initial iteration number 3.2, there are the least features and maximum changing needs from the end-users; the value ?   are 4.8479 and 0.171, respectively. These values are varying in the same way in each iteration release. For example, in iteration 3.3, the value ? is 3.8869 and   is 0.2140. For iteration 3.4 value ? is 2.9993, and the value   is 0.2680 showing perfectly how the requirements and functionality change in each iteration with end-user acceptance. In the end, ? values move towards completion of end-user requirements, and
18   acceptance level also increases, the value of ? the changes as 1.1052 and   as 0.7240.
   Table 6 shows the Goodness-of-fit measures of the Proposed Iterative Software Reliability (ISR) model and other models. The iteration number 3.2 performs better than other models except in terms of AE compared to the GOI model. The Proposed Iterative Software Reliability (ISR) model is estimating values in a best fitted way than other models in iteration 3.3. In case of iteration 3.4 for proposed Iterative Software Reliability (ISR) model, AE value is comparatively higher than the Mahapatra model, but it performs well in other cases. For iteration number 3.5, the JM model beats the Proposed Iterative Software Reliability (ISR) model in terms of TS. In Iteration number 3.6, the proposed Iterative Software Reliability (ISR) model works well, compared to other models, except that it deviates well from the JM model at SSE, MSE, and TS values. For iteration number 3.7 proposed Iterative Software Reliability (ISR) model is fighting with all other models except at MSE and AE, where there is a bond in its performance with other models. Overall proposed Model is fitted well for estimating the parameters of the models and can be used for estimating the reliability of JDT systems.
   The Proposed Iterative Software Reliability (ISR) model's reliability analysis using the JDT dataset is done in Figure 7. Failure intensity in Figure 8 is depicting the iteration's failure rate at each failure interval. There is a decreasing rate of failure at each iteration. In the initial iteration of JDT software, the failure rate decreases with low intensity; later on, when most bugs have been removed and almost all functionalities have been added, the iteration failure rate starts falling at high intensity. For example, in iteration numbers 3.6 and 3.7, there is a more decreasing failure rate than other iterations. This decreasing failure rate depicts that there is always an increase in end-user acceptance level and reliability with
20    added functionalities and bug removal in each successive iteration. In the final iteration
release, the software is at its full implementation of functionalities and ready for conclusive acceptance from the end-users.
4.3.3. Statistical evaluation
From the above discussion, we concluded that the proposed ISR model outperformed all the other models for both datasets, Eclipse and JDT. To statistically evaluate the results, we have used a non - parametric Friedman test. It is used to evaluate whether statistical difference also exist among various models when applied over multiple iterations. For Friedman test, the following hypotheses are created and then the value of ?2 is used to test the null hypothesis:
   Null Hypothesis (H0): There is no statistical difference between the performances of the compared models (JM model, GOI model), SW model, Mahapatra model, SWM model and the proposed ISR model). Alternative Hypothesis (H1): There exists statistical difference between the performances of the compared Models (JM model, GOI model), SW model, Mahapatra model, SWM model and the proposed ISR model). Friedman test was applied on all the performance measures for both the datasets. The p-values and the chi-square values given by Friedman test in shown in Table 7. From the Table 7, we can observe that for all the cases except one, the p-values proved that the results are significant at the 0.05 level of significance over 5 degrees of freedom. Since, the p-value is less than the significance level of 0.05 (shown in bold), the null hypothesis is rejected and alternate hypothesis is accepted. Thus, we say that there is statistical significant difference in the performance of the compared models. The ranks obtained by each model when using SSE, MSE, AE and TS are shown in Tables 8 and 9 for Eclipse and JDT datasets, respectively. The rank demonstrates the performance of all the models (lowest numerical rank value shows the highest performance). From Tables 8 and 9, we can observe that the top rank (shown in bold) is obtained by the proposed ISR model is all the cases for both the datasets. This demonstrates that the proposed ISR model is significantly better than the other compared models with respect to all the performance measures.
4.4. Discussion
The suitability of the model is shown on time-domain data sets. The Proposed Iterative Software Reliability (ISR) model is more adaptive to observed time-domain failure data sets than other failure rate models. Adaptation has been made possible because of the modulation parameter   used in the model. As the software development moves towards completion, this parameter changes its values according to added functionalities and user acceptance level in each successive iteration of software development. This parameter assumes that there is added functionality and user acceptance in each iterative development cycle. According to the functionality added in each iteration, there is a change in the requirements of iterative software development. The users' varying needs are reflected with modulation factors in the Proposed Iterative Software Reliability (ISR) model. The Proposed Iterative Software Reliability (ISR) model provides a good fit for the observed failure data. Values estimated in Tables 3 and 5 shows acceptable parameter values at all weights ?. With each iteration, functionality values and user acceptance increase (demonstrated by the value of modulation parameter that increases from lower to higher). There is a corresponding change in needs for iteration development (shown by modulation factor). Values of modulation factor and modulation parameter change suitably with each upcoming iteration in both the failure datasets, demonstrating well the iterative software development behavior. Depending on the values of the estimated parameters, the number of remaining faults in terms of expectation is calculated. In some cases, the prediction deviates by a small amount due to the introduction and removal of mutually dependent and independent faults in each iteration. This verifies the imperfect debugging phenomenon associated with each iterative software development. The Goodness-of-fit for models is shown in Tables 4 and 6 regarding SSE, MSE, AE, and TS values. The Proposed Iterative Software Reliability (ISR) model fits well in both the failure datasets used. The Proposed Iterative Software Reliability (ISR) model has outstanding performance in data analysis of both the failure datasets than JM, GOI, SW, Mahapatra et al. and SWM models in terms of Goodness values. In all iterations of datasets, Proposed Iterative Software Reliability (ISR) model reliability increases as several iterations proceeds. The last iteration is assumed to be the reliable iteration. This change in reliability is showing a value-added software development process. All models have been implemented using a hybrid PSO-GSA algorithm for parameter estimation. The Proposed Iterative Software Reliability (ISR) model shows considerable performance with a hybrid algorithm even with more parameters
22    than other models.
5. Threats to validity
In this section, we discuss potential threats which may affect the findings of the study. Conclusion validity threat in the proposed work is mitigated after evaluating the statistical viability of results with the use of two statistical tests. Researchers in this work have proposed a new Software reliability estimation model for reliability estimation of Eclipse and JDT software's. Proposed work has been compared with most relevant models available in the literature. Although no models is well fitted to all the failure datasets, each model is having its own assumptions and it works significantly well mainly for that type of dataset only for which it has been developed. Although other model comparison is done in the proposed research here for Eclipse and JDT software datasets and selection of most optimal model was not the primary aim of the study, this threat exists. However, to reach to a useful set of parameters, all the possible combinations of various parameters need to be explored. Parameter estimation plays an important role in the performance model development. Model parameters have been estimated and well pruned using hybrid swarm evolutionary algorithm. Another important factor which we considered was the use of stable performance metrics as Sum of Squared Errors, Mean Square Error, Absolute Error and Theil statistics to deal with the imbalanced nature of the datasets and models. Finally, the use of different datasets and models based on different assumptions also helps to reduce the conclusion validity threat. It may be noted that the models developed in the study can be used to detect software reliability at different iterations of software development. However, further studies should be conducted for analyzing the suitability of proposed model for determining change and acceptance levels at levels of iterations in the software development. This acts as a limitation to the applicability of the reported results. External validity threat concerned with the generalizability and replicability of the results is reduced in the proposed work due to the use of popular Tera Promise repository datasets used in this study which are freely available for the researchers to replicate the result, its findings and to conduct additional research. However more datasets belonging to different domains and applications need to be considered to ensure generalizability of the results. Further varied percentage of change-prone parameters of proposed model using hybrid swarm evolutionary algorithm across different datasets guarantees generalizability of the results. However, the study investigated parameter estimation using only hybrid swarm evolutionary algorithm only. Future experiments which involve more parameter estimation techniques likely using Machine learning or deep learning should be conducted to enhance the generalizability of the obtained results.
6. Conclusion and future scope
The majority of existing failure rate models are based on the classic waterfall software development lifecycle process model. However, new software development techniques, such as iterative life cycle processes, have been created and shown to be more effective than waterfall software development lifecycle processes. The Proposed Iterative Software Reliability (ISR) model makes use of the iterative nature of software development. The Proposed Iterative Software Reliability (ISR) model uses a modulation factor to represent the changing demands in each iteration. Software development features reduce at the end; accordingly modulation factor changes its value. Debugging is never perfect, so imperfect debugging has been
incorporated by assuming fault introduction and removal. A realistic iterative software    23
development feature has been added to the Proposed Iterative Software Reliability (ISR) model perfectly and accurately. The Goodness-of-fit measure of the models is done using SSE, MSE, AE, and TS values. The Proposed Iterative Software Reliability (ISR) model fits all application datasets for each analysis and fulfils all the authentic assumptions during iterative software development. The proposed model has major beating SSE, MSE, AE, and TS values than JM, GO, SW, SWM, and Mahapatra et al. models when applied on both the datasets. According to various Goodness-of-fit measures, the proposed model is about 52% significant from other models in the case of Eclipse failure data analysis for iteration
1.0. It performs by about 30% using 2.0 to 2.1 and 3.0 to 3.6 iterations. Similarly proposed model has about 35% higher goodness than other used models. When the JDT software failure dataset is analyzed for Proposed Iterative Software Reliability (ISR) model fitness, the proposed model beats other failure rate models by about 55%. In each analysis done, the Proposed Iterative Software Reliability (ISR) model is found to be reaching acceptable performance and could be applied on other software failure datasets for further validation. Other reasonable criteria for finding Goodness-of-fit for the model can be developed, and a method for finding upper and lower bounds for estimation can be proposed in the future.
Data availability
Both the code for the algorithm and the datasets obtained after preprocessing are vailable in the replication package available at https://zenodo.org/records/13147825.