Abstract
Background: In software engineering, each software product has a life cycle that at
some point results in a decision being made with regard to extending its maintenance or
upgrading the system to a new platform and architecture via a re-engineering or migration
process. However, sometimes this decision is a non-starter; the technical dept accumulates,
and platforms cease to exist, meaning that there will always be a time when extending
the life support of a legacy system is no longer simply an option, and the service must be
modernized.
Aim: In this paper, we focus on the migration processes, where a legacy system is updated
to a microservice architecture, to understand the current state-of-the-art, applied industry
practices and potential pitfalls or research gaps in the topic domain. The study aims to
explore previous research to find related trends and expose gaps in the literature.
Method: We conducted a systematic mapping study on the research trends within the
topic of redesign and re-engineering projects related to microservice architectures to
understand what we know about microservices, what the current research trends in the
area are, and if possible, what the common nominators for successful migration processes
are.
Results: Our observations reveal that most microservice migration research is confined to
journal articles and conference proceedings. However, a severe fragmentation in publication
venues exists within the field. Furthermore, the focus of the research field is primarily
on the transformation phase of the re-engineering process, with the majority of the
contributions being managerial in nature, particularly of the process type. Additionally,
over 50% of the research conducted is empirical in nature.
Conclusion: Based on the results, microservice migration research is maturing well; most
of the research is empirical. The research field is scattered. There are notable technical,
managerial, and organizational challenges and differing motivations. To better understand
the motivations and challenges of the practitioners, we are going to conduct survey and
interview studies within this field.
Keywords: legacy systems, microservice architecture, monolithic architecture,
microservice migration
1. Introduction
In the software life cycle, each product reaches a point where a decision has to be made
between extending the system maintenance, killing the software, or modernizing and
migrating the legacy system into a new architecture and modern platform. In this work,
© 2024 The Authors. Published by Wrocław University of Science and Technology Publishing House.
This is an open access article under the CC BY
license international.
Submitted: 13 Jun. 2023; Revised: 14 Nov. 2023; Accepted: 15 Nov. 2023; Available online: 17 Nov. 2023
we conducted a systematic mapping study (SMS) [1] to study one such legacy software
modernization trend – the trend of migrating monolithic legacy software systems toward
microservice architecture (MSA). MSA has become popular due to recent technological
advancements, such as cloud computing and containerization, which promise to allow easier
service scaling, cost management, maintenance, and faster development cycles, amongst
other benefits. Furthermore, the overall digitalization of the business world is forcing
companies to search for more dynamic and adaptive software architectures.
1.1. Microservice technology
Microservices are small, self-sufficient processes that interact with each other using messaging protocols, such as Representational State Transfer (REST) [2–4]. MSA is a distributed
cloud-native architecture that is based on service architecture (SOA) [5, 6], where developers
can create, test, and deploy microservices using different development stacks and platforms
[5]. Traditionally, the software has been developed as monolithic, meaning that a single
executable handles all the features of a given software system [6].
Three core technologies are often utilized when using MSA. First is cloud computing;
microservice based systems often run in a cloud environment where computing resources
can be scaled up or down depending on the user traffic. The second is containerization;
microservices are often containerized, which enables them to be deployed quickly and
managed by container management software, such as Kubernetes [7]. Third, continuous
integration and delivery automation processes [8] mean that the entire process, from
development and quality assurance to staging and deployment, is automated to enable fast
iterations and even roll-backs in case of faulty releases.
1.2. State of the industry
The research related to microservices has seen an increase during the past decade. In around
2010, the term microservice started to rise in popularity [9], with many large companies
using MSA to build their software systems. For example, Sound Cloud [10], Netflix [11],
and Uber [12] have adopted MSA as their service architecture. However, as the MSA model
is mainly based on industry-driven needs and development, this might also correlate to the
need for more literature and stricter definitions of MSA [13].
Large and complex monolithic software systems are prime candidates for MSA migration.
Software systems built with MSA are less prone to accumulating complexity during
their lifetimes. Software developed with distributed architecture is more self-contained
than software with a monolithic architecture. It allows components to be developed and
maintained separately from other parts, allowing the software system to stay robust and
responsive [4]. Companies often choose to adopt MSA depending on their needs, as MSA
has a reputation for having quality attributes such as availability, flexibility, maintainability,
scalability, and loose coupling as built-in features [14, 15].
The motivation for this research arose from a previous study where we documented
migrating from a legacy system to an MSA. During the research process, we found a lack
of related research into migrating from legacy systems to MSA, which was unusual as the
revision, replacement, and re-engineering work of legacy systems is not in any way an
uncommon activity in the software industry. For this reason, we decided to conduct a more
comprehensive literature review on migrating from legacy software to MSA.
This study aims to explore previous research to find related trends and expose gaps
in the literature. In this study, we want to review the literature on migrating to MSA
from legacy systems. More precisely, we want to study the research trends (publication
venues and periods), the migration process phase in which migration to MSA research is
focused (reverse engineering, transformation, or forward engineering), and the research
contribution types to understand how MSA migration processes have been investigated
in the prior works. The rest of this research paper is structured as follows: related work,
methods, analysis, threats to validity, discussion, and conclusion.
2. Related work
This section discusses the research related to our topic: migrating to MSA. We will give
short summaries of the related research papers, discuss their relevance to this study, and
synthesize how they motivated it.
Carrasco et al. [16] conducted a literature study on microservice migration bad smells.
They wanted to know what architectural and migration-related bad smells are common with
MSA and how to avoid them. Their study identified nine common pitfalls as architectural
smells from 58 sources, including academic and gray literature, between 2014 and 2018. The
nine pitfalls are divided into five new architectural bad smells and four migration-related
smells. The most common pitfalls were single-layered teams, including multiple services in
one container, being greedy with containers, and simultaneously rewriting the entire system
for microservices. They offer solutions for detecting and solving the pitfalls mentioned
earlier. Carrasco et al.’s [16] research has an architectural focus, researching architectural
pitfalls. Their study relates to ours by investigating the migration process toward MSA.
However, they focus on specific architectural problems, whereas our work is more general
and considers the literature and its visible trends. They also use grey literature, while we
focus on academia [16].
In 2018, Knoche et al. [17] conducted a survey study on German professionals with 71
participants. They studied the primary drivers for MSA adoption, barriers to adoption, the
goals of modernizing MSA, and how data consistency affects performance. They conclude
that the prime drivers for modernization are scalability, maintainability, and time to market.
The skills of developers and other staff were seen as the main barriers. As for goals, early
adopters desired scalability from MSA, while traditional companies wanted maintainability.
Performance was considered a minor issue. The authors call for similar work from other
countries. They also researched migration to MSA. However, they conducted an empirical
study in the form of a survey study. Furthermore, their research focuses on the motivation
for migration and the barriers to adoption [17].
Velepucha et al. [18] conducted an SMS on migrating to microservices. The study
included 32 primary research papers from 2012 to 2020. The research papers were only
from academia. In their study, Velepucha et al. wanted to determine the types of migration
proposals present in the literature and which are based on the information hiding principle.
They found multiple proposals related to migrating to microservices, for example, those
using DevOps, cloud computing, and performance in infrastructure. They identified that
only two papers discussed migration principles, of which only one was the information
hiding principle. None of the research papers proposed a software development principle to
migrate from a monolithic system to MSA [18]. Our work shares some similarities with
Velepucha et al. [18] as they also classified research papers based on the type of research.
However, unlike our approach, they did not use Wieringa et al.’s [19] classification. We
limited our review to literature published after 2015 as we focused on the current state of
the art rather than the early stages of MSA. Additionally, we analyzed various metrics
related to research approaches and publication year, venue, and type.
Hassan et al. [20] conducted a large SMS based on academic and industrial literature.
They analyzed 877 publications from various sources between January 2013 and April 2020.
Their study had two objectives: first, to study the transition process to microservices and,
second, to understand the fundamental problem of transitioning, the granularity problem of
transitioning to microservices. Additionally, they classified the analyzed literature [20]. Our
research shows some similarities with the SMS conducted by Hassan et al. [20] regarding
MSA migrations. Like us, they also used the classification schema by Wieringa et al. [19] to
classify their research. However, their research mainly focused on the issue of granularity
when transitioning to microservices. Additionally, their study included grey literature,
which is not the case in our research.
Auer et al. [21] conducted an interview study. They researched why companies migrate
to MSA, the information metrics used, and the most helpful information metrics. Their
interview study included 52 respondents from software development practitioners over five
days in 2018. Based on the interviews, the authors generated an assessment framework to
ease the decision-making when migrating to MSA. Their interviews with practitioners found
that the most common reason for migrating to MSA was to improve maintainability. Other
common reasons were independent teams, deployability, and cost, whereas modularity,
complexity, fault tolerance, scalability, and reusability were less popular characteristics.
The research by Auer et al. [21] relates to our study by discussing the MSA migration
process. However, their study focuses on the motivation of the practitioners and the metrics
they use to collect information. In contrast, our study focuses more on general information
about the research field, the re-engineering phase, and the research contribution types.
Moreover, their study is a survey study rather than an SMS [21].
Razzaq et al. [22] conducted an SMS study on MSA migrations. The study included
73 primary research papers from 2010 to 2021. Their goal was to evaluate the state and
practice of MSA literature. They researched publication trends and venues, research focus,
migration approaches and challenges, success factors post-migration, and the potential
for industrial adoption. Related to the publication trends, they note that the volume of
publications is progressively rising. They suggest future researchers focus on MSA in the
context of the Internet of Things [22]. Razzaq et al. [22] and our study analyze publication
trends, venues, and types. However, our approach differs as we delve into the publication
contributions and re-engineering phase the research focuses on.
Our study on SMS migration to MSA did not have much directly comparable research
available. However, we have identified the research papers that are most similar to our
study in terms of the research period, method, contributions, and goals. The list of these
research papers can be found in Table 1. While we found more secondary research related
to MSA from different perspectives, there was no MSA-related research available in 2014,
according to secondary sources cited in [23] and [24]. There has been a significant increase
in MSA-related research since 2015 [23] and 2016 [24]. Waseem et al. [25] also reported
a growth in MSA-related research between 2015 and 2018 [25]. Pahl et al. [23] suggest that
follow-up research should be directed toward aspects such as microservices migration [23].
Furthermore, multiple authors highlight the novelty of the MSA research field [13, 20, 23, 24].
More recently (2022), Razzaq et al. [22] reported a progressively rising number of research
from year to year.
Many of the studies in our related research indicate the novelty of the research field and
room for more research from different perspectives, including research within the subfield
of migrating to MSA. We only found six directly related studies [16–18, 20–22], from which
only four [16, 18, 20, 22] were SMSs. Our research attempts to fill this gap by summarizing
the current state of research related to MSA migrations and by observing the specific
re-engineering phase where the research is focused.
3. Methods
This section goes through the main phases of our research process; we followed the SMS
guidelines described by Petersen et al. [1], also illustrated in Figure 1. An SMS is a research
methodology that categorizes research papers and visualizes these to create a map of the
researched subject [26] in the form of a conceptual map, categorization, or some other
layout. An SMS is recommended as the research methodology in software engineering when
the research area is still emerging and a substantial quantity of high-quality studies have
yet to be completed. However, the data collection and analysis scheme is not as in-depth
in similar systematic literature review models [26]. SMSs are commonly used in several
domains [27], with medicine and software engineering being the most prominent areas of
application [28]. The main phases of our research process are defining research questions,
conducting the search, screening papers, keywording, and data extraction and mapping,
as defined by Petersen et al., with all the phases having an output forwarded to the next
stage; the final product is the systematic map that visualizes the results.
Based on our background work, we defined three research questions for this study.
We wanted to research the period from 2015 to 2023 to capture the trends found in the
microservice migration literature during that time and minimize the number of non-related
topics that might share similar terminology; we also wanted to analyze the research trends,
the focus of research within the re-engineering process, and the contributions of the existing
research work. These goals are reflected in the research questions as follows:
RQ1 – What are the research approaches implemented by the researchers?
This research question provides us with general information about the research field,
which is important for analyzing the current trends in the literature.
RQ2 – What phase of the re-engineering process is addressed by the research papers?
The answer to this research question allows us to analyze which part of the re-engineering
process is the most researched and where gaps in the research exist. We used the
horseshoe model to define the different phases of re-engineering [29].
RQ3 – What are the contribution types of the research papers?
This question explores the concrete contributions to microservice migration research
and the broader scientific community. We developed a contribution-type classification
using an iterative process based on an example by Petersen et al. [1].
We used Google Scholar’s research database to get research material for this SMS.
We chose to use Google Scholar because it obtains research material from many different
publishers and databases, such as ACM, IEEE, and Springer while having few to no
limitations regarding the research domains or areas of expertise. Google Scholar can query
articles with words using the following options: all, exact phrase, at least one, and without.
These different options can be combined. It is possible to select where in the article the
words appear: anywhere in the article or only in the title. Additionally, the author and
publisher of the article can be specified, and publication dates can be indicated. We used
the default search, which returned articles that included all the words from our search
string, and looked for the latter anywhere in the article [30]. The only limitations we set
for Google Scholar were not to include patents and the time frame. Google Scholar orders
the results according to their relevance based on the full text, source, author, and number
of citations [31].
The search was conducted using a search string developed by testing keywords against
the database. The goal was to find a search string that yielded all the meaningful research
papers that reflect the research area. The search results were evaluated manually to estimate
whether they matched the research area. The evaluation was performed by the number
of citations, the text’s topic (related to the research topic), the author, and the source.
As suggested by Petersen et al. [1], the search string reflected the research questions.
The final search string was “microservices legacy software migration modernization”. We
conducted two searches on Google Scholar: the first in 8/2020 (from 2015 to 8/2020) and
the second in 8/2023 (from 2020 to 8/2023) to update the primary research papers. The
search yielded 487 initial results in 2020 and an additional 821 results in 2023, giving
a total of 1308 search results. Because Google Scholar’s results change over time, we
have saved the original search results list to a cloud service for repeatability purposes
(https://dx.doi.org/10.6084/m9.figshare.24426889).
Selection criteria were applied to the search results to filter out the unwanted results.
The filtering used the inclusion and exclusion criteria shown in Tables 2 and 3, respectively.
The number of citations was not considered as it would have given a less realistic view
of the research area. Figure 2 shows the search process and application of the selection
criteria. First, we applied our selection criteria to the initial research and removed any
duplicates that could be identified. Later, during the data extraction phase, a few papers
were removed as they did not fit the scope of this study.
Research with more than four pages of text.
Research from 2015 to 8/2020 in the first search and 2020 to 8/2023 in the second search
Research in the following publication formats: books, research papers, conference papers, and
journal articles.
Research written in English.
Research that is publicly accessible.
Research that explicitly discusses the theme of this SMS (i.e., the migration of legacy software
systems to MSA).
Exclusion criteria
Research duplicates matched with regard to the author, publication year, and title.
Research that is not peer-reviewed.
Research discussing microservices but not the process for migrating to MSA.
We used existing and generic classification methods to manage the data extraction
process for the first two research questions. We generated a classification through the
keywording process for the third research question. For the research approaches (RQ1), we
used the following parameters: publication type, venue, and date; publisher; and research
strategy. This research question queries general information about the research field. For
the publication type, we use a simple categorization: journal, workshop paper, book, or
conference proceeding and the publication venue, publisher, and date. Finally, we used the
classification by Wieringa [19] to classify the research strategies, illustrated in Table 4. This
categorization method is general and does not depend on any specific research field [1].
For the re-engineering phase (RQ2), we used the horseshoe model to divide the re-engineering process into reverse engineering, transformation, and forward engineering. Reverse
engineering includes the acts of understanding, abstracting, and extracting a high-level
model of the source system. For example, this could include software that helps understand
existing systems or identifies microservice candidates. Transformation improves, restructures, and extends the previously mentioned high-level system model. For example, this
could be in the form of processes or tools that help shape the new architecture. Finally,
forward engineering generates a new, improved system [29]. For example, this could include
guidelines and tools that help generate the new system in practice. We categorized the
The techniques investigated are novel and have not yet been implemented. The
techniques used are, for example, experiments (i.e., work done in the lab).
Techniques are implemented in practice and evaluated. This type of research
shows how a technique is implemented in practice (solution implementation)
and the consequences of the implementation in terms of benefits and drawbacks
(implementation evaluation). This also includes identifying problems in the
industry.
A solution for a problem is proposed; the solution can be either novel or a significant extension of an existing technique. A small example or a good line of
argumentation shows the solution’s potential benefits and applicability.
These papers sketch a new way of looking at existing things by structuring the
field in the form of a taxonomy or conceptual framework.
These papers express the opinion of somebody on whether a certain technique is
good or bad or how things should be done. They do not rely on related work
and research methodologies.
Experience papers explain what and how something has been done in practice
based on the author’s personal experiences.
research papers by reading them and assigning them to one or more categories based on their
topics and content, as a research paper can discuss multiple phases of the re-engineering
process.
Finally, to assess the research contributions (RQ3), we classified them using an iterative
keywording process by Petersen et al. [1]. We read through the studies and collected
keywords and concepts representing their contributions. The context of the research was also
identified. After collecting the keywords, we combined them to form a classification scheme.
The classification scheme we ended up with consists of the following: process, analysis, tool,
method, best practices, experience sharing, and metrics. A process is a structured approach
to migrating to MSA. Analysis covers papers focusing on migration’s issues and benefits
and other literature. The tool assists in the migration process (i.e., software that can help
with the migration process). A method provides systematic ways to achieve specific tasks
within the broader migration process. Best practices are guidelines based on successful
migrations. Experience sharing offers practical insights from real-world migration scenarios.
The metrics can measure and evaluate different aspects of the migration process.
4. Analysis
This study aims to discover trends related to legacy software modernization, specifically
migrating from legacy applications to microservices. The study was conducted as an SMS.
A pool of 1308 research papers was the starting point. After the inclusion and exclusion,
109 were chosen for further analysis and categorization. In this section, we analyze the
results of the categorization process.
4.1. Research areas and approaches (RQ1)
In this section, we review the results of the first research question: “(RQ1) What are the
research approaches?” The first research question queried the research approaches and
Journal Article
publication information in relation to the primary research. These include the publication
venue, publication time, publication type, and research type. The publication information
helps us understand the current state of the research field and find any gaps that need to
be filled.
We divided the publications into four groups: journal articles, conference papers, books,
and workshop papers. Figure 3 shows the total numbers of the different publication types.
Most research papers were either conference papers (58%) or journal articles (34%). In
contrast, there is a relatively small amount of workshop papers.
Figure 4 shows the number of publications published annually from 2015 to 2023. It
should be noted that 2023 has only partial data, as this study was conducted during the
fall of that year. Also notable is that, in our primary research, there were no publications
from 2015; the first MSA migration-related publications in our primary research material
are from 2016. The lack of research is understandable since microservice technology only
started to attract interest from 2010 onward [9]. We can observe a significant increase
in publications from 2018, with a slight decrease in 2019 and a steady level thereafter.
Regarding the publication types, we can see that conference papers and journal articles
have more stable publication numbers than books and workshop papers.
With regard to the various publication venues listed in Table 7, we can see severe
fragmentation; only a few research papers are published through the same publication venues,
meaning that 109 research papers are published through 91 different ones. The exceptions
are the IEEE ICSA-C conference (4), IEEE Software Journal (3), IEEE International
Conference on Software Architecture (ICSA) (3), Euromicro Conference on Software
Engineering and Advanced Applications (SEAA) (3), and International Journal of Advanced
Computer Science and Applications (IJACSA) (3), all with three or more publications.
The publication venues also have distinct focus areas, for example, software architecture
(i.e., ICSA, ICSA-C), cloud computing (i.e., ESOCC), software maintenance (i.e., ICSME,
VEM), development operations (i.e., DEVOPS), software refactoring (i.e., IWoR), data
analysis (i.e., SADASC), and software engineering (i.e., APSEC, SBES, and SEAA). The
rest of the publication venues are listed in Table B1 in Appendix B.
Table 7. Publication venues with more than one publication from our primary research papers.
The rest of the publication venues are listed in Appendix B
Publication venue
IEEE International Conference on Software Architecture Companion
(ICSA-C)
IEEE Software
IEEE International Conference on Software Architecture (ICSA)
Euromicro Conference on Software Engineering and Advanced Applications
(SEAA)
International Journal of Advanced Computer Science and Applications
(IJACSA)
Software: Practice and Experience
On the Move to Meaningful Internet Systems: OTM Workshops
International Journal of Computer Applications (IJCA)
Software Engineering Aspects of Continuous Development and New
Paradigms of Software Production and Deployment (DEVOPS)
Brazilian Symposium on Software Components, Architectures, and Reuse
(SBCARS)
Empirical Software Engineering (EMSE)
International Conference on Advanced Information Systems Engineering
(CAiSE)
The research types were analyzed using the classification schema by Wieringa et al. [19].
We chose this classification method because of its wide use in other systematic mapping
studies (e.g., Di Francesco [24], Agilar et al. [32], Alshuqayran et al. [13]) and because it is
often possible to classify a study without reading the whole paper, which saves time [1].
The classification schema consists of the following categories: validation research, evaluation
research, solution proposals, philosophical papers, opinion papers, and experience papers,
as listed in Table 2.
Figure 5 shows the distributions of the research types. The most used research type is
validation research (33%), which investigates novel techniques in controlled environments.
Philosophical papers (23%) are the second most popular research type; these papers review
the research area and create taxonomies and conceptual frameworks. The third most
popular research type is evaluation research (19%), meaning that many researchers are
testing their techniques in practice and showing the benefits and drawbacks of those
techniques (evaluating their implementations). The fourth most popular research type is
experience research (13%), indicating that many researchers in this field only reported
their experiences. Finally, the least popular research types are solution proposals (12%)
and opinion papers (0%).
The research types can be divided into empirical and non-empirical research. Nonempirical types are solution proposals, opinion papers, experience papers, and philosophical
papers. Empirical study types are validation and evaluation research. Most of the studies
(52%) are empirical and use verified data and observations to support research results,
while only (48%) are non-empirical. Empirical studies are critical for validating theories,
models, tools, and other migration-related artifacts.
4.2. Re-engineering phase (RQ2)
The second research question deals with the re-engineering phase: “(RQ2) What phase of
the re-engineering process is addressed by the research papers?” To research this question,
we utilized the horseshoe model, which divides the re-engineering process into three phases:
reverse engineering, transformation, and forward engineering [29]. We classified the primary
research papers according to the three re-engineering phases. The distribution of the
re-engineering phases can be seen in Figure 6. It should be noted that a research paper can
cover multiple re-engineering phases, meaning that the sum of the results is not the sum of
the research papers. Almost half of the research papers (48%) focused on transformation,
Transformation
Forward engineering
while around a third (30%) covered reverse engineering, and around a fifth (22%) focused
on forward engineering, as shown in Figure 6.
4.3. Contributions to the domain (RQ3)
This section answers the third research question: “(RQ3) What are the contribution types
of the research papers?” Seven different contribution categories were identified from the
research papers: process, experience sharing, best practice, analysis, method, tool, and
metric. Figure 7 shows the distribution of the research contributions. Nearly half (44%) of
the research papers contributed to the research topic with a process, most often describing
the actions that can or should be taken to accomplish the goal of migrating to MSA. After
the process, the next most popular contribution type was analysis (24%), followed by
tool (9%) and method (8%). Conversely, best practice (7%), experience sharing (6%), and
metrics (2%) were the least common contribution types.
To better understand the contributions, they can be further categorized according to the
contribution type into technical and managerial contributions. Agilar et al. [32] used this
categorization method in their research for a similar purpose. A managerial contribution
describes a process, method, or approach that manages the migration process. A technical
Figure 7. Distribution of the research paper contribution types toward
the legacy system migration domain. References in Table 10
contribution might be a tool, a metric, or software to support migration efforts. Using this
categorization method on our primary research documents yielded 90% managerial and
10% technical contributions.
4.4. Key findings
Our main findings are summarized in Table 11. While not all-inclusive, these gaps in the
research and observations are worth highlighting. We can observe the publication trends,
research approaches, and publication venues, as well as gain a better understanding of the
MSA migration process.
The year 2018 saw a significant increase in published research writings, mostly journal articles
and conference papers. Overall, conference papers and journal articles dominate the publication
types.
Research into MSA migration has grown significantly between 2015 and 8/2023.
Publication venues are scattered across different application domains and distinct topics.
The primary research identified is split between empirical (52%) and non-empirical (48%)
work.
Primary research papers mostly focused on the transformation (48%) phase of the re-engineering
process, rather than reverse engineering (30%) or forward engineering (22%)
Managerial contributions account for 90% of all contributions, with processes being the most
common type (44%).
The first research question focused on the publication trends related to the primary research.
Based on our results, the research on migrating legacy systems to MSA has increased from
2016 onward, as seen from Figure 4. Our primary research found no papers related to
MSA migrations from 2015. However, the increasing number of publications in our primary
research suggests growth, possibly supported by technological innovations (cloud platforms,
containers, and DevOps), shifts in the software architectural landscape, and a move away
from monolithic architecture and toward distributed architecture. Related to the growth of
MSA migration research, we observed common motivations for migration in the primary
research papers: scalability (P5, P8, P12, P17, P19, P21, P25, P27, P28, P32, P42, P47,
P58, P65, P71, P86, P87, P90, P103, P106, P107, P109), maintainability (P1, P2, P8, P18,
P24, P25, P28, P32, P38, P42, P51, P65, P66, P77, P86, P103), time to market (P8, P30),
adaptability to new technologies (P2, P25, P30), and flexibility (P42, P56, P57, P87, P90,
P107). A possible reason for these motivations may be the need for more flexible software
architectures in the increasingly digitalized world.
The distribution of research types in our primary research is dominated by validation
research (33%), suggesting a strong emphasis on testing and validating new research
artifacts in controlled settings. Research in the field of philosophy (23%) often involves the
creation of taxonomies and conceptual frameworks, which provides clarity to the field and
suggests a mature research area. Evaluation research, which accounts for 19% of the research
conducted, serves as a bridge between theory and practice. The significant representation
of evaluation research suggests that the field of research is increasingly focused on applying
theoretical knowledge to practical situations and discovering the practical benefits and
limitations of research techniques. Experience research accounts for only 13% of the data
and is based on anecdotal evidence, lacking in testing or validation. Nevertheless, it still
provides valuable real-world information. The presence of experience research indicates
that practical insights and lessons learned from practitioners are still highly valued in the
field. Solution proposals account for only 12% of papers in the field, focusing on validating
rather than proposing new solutions.
Related to the research type, we found that a majority of it is empirical, indicating that
the research field is developing and becoming more mature. This suggests that researchers
are gaining a better understanding of the challenges, benefits, and nuances of migrating to
MSA by validating their theories and strategies with real-world data. The abundance of
validation and evaluation research also indicates that researchers are willing to test and
improve the existing theories and strategies related to the migration process. Additionally,
practitioners can benefit from the wealth of tried and tested tools, processes, and techniques
available to them. Meanwhile, researchers have the opportunity to develop new methods
by building on previous successful ones or experimenting with untested approaches.
Our primary research publications are mostly journal articles or conference proceedings.
Similar results are reported in the related research by Di Francesco et al. [24] and Hassan
et al. [20]. The tilt toward journals and conferences is understandable as they are more
scientifically rewarding than workshop publications. Targeting more challenging publication
venues is a good sign as that indicates that the research is of higher quality. We also
observed fragmentation in the publication venues, as was also noted by Di Francesco et
al. [24]; their study did not directly relate to ours as it focused on architecting with MSA
rather than migrating to MSA; however, there is a clear parallel between their findings
and ours regarding the publication venues. The fragmentation of publication venues
suggests that researchers approach the MSA migration process from multiple disciplines
with differing concerns. The fragmentation can also make it difficult for researchers and
practitioners to navigate the literature on MSA migrations. This can make it challenging
to identify influential research, gather knowledge, and ensure comprehensive coverage when
conducting literature reviews. Furthermore, the fragmentation can cause redundancy as
multiple researchers may work on similar research in isolation. For practitioners, this can
cause obstacles when trying to access the latest best practices available, which can delay
the introduction of new ones.
The second research question queried the phase of the re-engineering process that the
research papers discussed. It was found that the most commonly discussed re-engineering
phase was transformation, accounting for 48% of the papers, which was more popular
than reverse engineering (30%) and forward engineering (22%). The difference between
the transformation phase and the other re-engineering phases indicates that researchers
are most interested in studying tools, workflows, and processes that transition the legacy
architecture to a more modern form. This might imply that while reverse engineering and
forward engineering are essential, the transformation phase is the most difficult of the
three or that there are more well-established practices in the other two. From the primary
research, we observed the following challenges related to the re-engineering process: the
absence of suitable decomposition approaches (P28), the high level of coupling between
software components (P23, P26, P27, P30, P35, P84), the lack of guidelines and best
practices for migration (P7, P27, P30, P50, P67), and the identification of microservices
from existing systems and boundary recognition (P3, P11, P13, P16, P17, P27, P28,
P30, P32, P33, P34, P36, P39). However, many solutions are also proposed to identify
microservices (P53, P55, P59, P61, P78).
The third research question aimed to identify the types of contributions made in each
research paper. The results showed that the most popular contribution type was process
(44%), which indicates that migration is a challenging task that requires precise and
straightforward processes to guide practitioners. The analysis research type accounted for
24% of research, indicating interest in understanding migration’s issues and benefits. Out of
all the research articles, 9% describe tools. This indicates that the field is gradually moving
toward creating software that can help with the migration process. However, further research
into tooling related to the migration process toward MSA could benefit the field. Only 8%
of the research articles were related to the method. This suggests less focus on refining and
introducing new techniques to address specific challenges. Best practices (7%) are crucial
for organizations migrating to MSA. However, their relatively low percentage suggests that
the field is still consolidating these practices. As more organizations migrate, consolidating
and documenting best practices will become increasingly important. Experience sharing
is only responsible for 6% of contributions. Experience sharing provides valuable lessons
for practitioners, given the unique challenges that each migration can present. The field
could benefit from more experience-sharing contributions. Metrics account for only 2% of
the contribution types. Their low percentage implies that standard metrics are yet to be
developed. As the field grows, there may be an increasing demand for standardized metrics
to assess the MSA migrations.
Further analysis shows that 90% of the research contributions are managerial instead
of technical; Hassan et al. report similar results regarding MSA migration literature [20].
The significant difference between managerial and technical contributions might be that
managerial contributions are more relevant in the migration process.
Other trends we noticed were the limitations of MSA, particularly that MSA is not
a silver bullet solution for legacy migrations (P4, P5, P7, P25, P31). P4 and P7 analyzed
different migration methods and concluded that there are many different methods for
migration, and practitioners must choose the right one depending on their circumstances.
The authors of P5 report on their experience working with an MSA migration project;
they conclude that microservices are not a one-size-fits-all solution as they introduce new
complexities into systems, and many factors, such as distribution complexities, should be
considered before adopting this style. P31 argues that there is no single way to implement
an MSA into an existing system but that practitioners should know the common pitfalls
of such processes. Additionally, it is noted in P35 that there is a lack of evidence for the
benefits of mixing different migration methods.
Challenges worth researching are organizational challenges, such as the mindsets of
developers during the migration process (P27), the skill sets of developers (P8, P28), and
convincing management of the importance of migration (P30). Decentralizing databases is
another challenge worth investigating further (P35, P26, P27, P42, P49, P68, P87, P103). In
addition, our research suggests that the transactions between microservices are a challenge
for practitioners to deal with, so research defining proper guidelines on migrating without
performance degradation is critical (P6, P27, P38, P32).
The future of migration toward MSA can be seen through various automated tools,
frameworks, and methods for migration, identification, or refactoring. These tools are
highlighted in the following research papers: P75, P76, P78, P86, P88, P89, P90, P91,
P95, P96, P99, P100, P101, and P108. Advanced techniques and innovations, such as
reinforcement learning, are introduced in papers P81, P94, P101, and P104 to support the
migration process.
Our research has identified areas with significant challenges or a lack of research, and we
recommend conducting further research in these fields. Evaluation research is a significant
part of primary research but could still be expanded. This is because practitioners find it
challenging to adopt scientific implementations without evidence that they work in practice.
There may be a lack of opportunities for evaluation research, as modernizing software from
old legacy systems to MSA is still relatively rare. Additionally, companies may hesitate to
invite researchers to join or find it hard to enter these large projects that continue for many
years. We suggest exploring experience research and solution proposals to provide more
real-world insights and challenges and address unresolved issues with innovative solutions.
Regarding the fragmentation of publication venues, we suggest several potential solutions
to address this issue. These include conducting more literature reviews that provide an
overview of the research field, creating centralized repositories to gather literature and
increase accessibility, organizing interdisciplinary workshops and conferences to bring
together researchers from different disciplines working with MSA migrations, implementing
unified standards for all publication venues, promoting open access publishing to increase
availability, and educating new researchers about the research field.
Related to re-engineering, much of the research is focused on the transformation phase.
We suggest conducting more research on reverse and forward engineering to understand
the whole migration process better. Additionally, it would be useful to investigate the
challenges of re-engineering, such as the absence of suitable decomposition strategies and
the handling of high coupling in software components.
It is essential to encourage more research toward developing tools and methods that
can support the process of migrating. The documentation and consolidation of the best
practices for MSA migration should be promoted, and experts should share experiences to
capture real-world insights. Developing standardized metrics for evaluating MSA migrations
is also crucial.
Promoting research that provides guidelines for choosing the appropriate migration
method based on specific circumstances is important. Additionally, organizational challenges,
such as those related to the developer mindset and skill set, as well as the role of management in
MSA migration, should be investigated. Research on decentralizing databases and managing
transactions between microservices can also be promoted. The development of automated
tools, frameworks, and methods should be encouraged to simplify the MSA migration
process. Furthermore, promoting research on advanced techniques, such as reinforcement
learning, can help to support the MSA migration process.
The challenges and motivations we observed from our primary research have inspired
us to do more research in this field. In particular, we want to focus on the motivations and
challenges related to MSA migrations. We will conduct empirical research on this topic
using survey research and interviews.
6. Threats to validity
The threats to validity are classified according to the classification by Wohlin et al. [33].
They give four categories for threats to validity: conclusion, internal, external, and construct.
The threats that we have identified are classified as internal and external. Internal threats
are those that can affect the study results without the knowledge of the researcher. External
threats limit the applicability of the results to the real world.
Regarding the internal validity threats, we implemented inclusion and exclusion criteria
to enhance the exactness of the primary research further. As part of our criteria, we
restricted the language to English only, which excluded 67 potential research papers from
the study. Furthermore, we did not include any grey literature in our study. We do not
believe that the lack of grey literature impacts the validity of our research, as peer-reviewed
papers must go through strict quality gates, which improves the quality of the research
papers included in this study. Another possible threat to validity is bias in selecting research
papers. One researcher chose the research papers manually, which may have introduced
bias in the selection process. The potential for bias was mitigated by strictly following the
exclusion and inclusion criteria.
In terms of the external validity threats, the research in this paper is limited to the
research discussing the migration of legacy systems to MSA. The most critical external
threat to the validity of this study is that we did not do backward-forward snowballing to
gather more potential primary research papers. The potentially missed primary research
papers mean our study may not entirely represent the MSA migration research field. We
utilized Google Scholar to search for research articles. The results are limited by publication
policies, which may affect the accessibility and visibility of the results. Further limitations
of Google Scholar are the inability to create complex search strings using Boolean operators
and nesting. It is also only possible to search based on the title or full text; it cannot define
proximity to the searched words; it cannot use complex dates, only date ranges. In addition,
the subject area is broad because there are no predefined sections for each subject matter.
7. Conclusion
Interest in MSA has seen an increase during the past decade. The interest is fuelled
by technological advancements, such as cloud computing, automation (DevOps), and
containerization, as well as by the overall trend of digitalization and the way software is
consumed through the internet via browsers and mobile devices. Therefore, in this study,
we have studied the literature related to migrating from legacy systems to MSA.
We identified a pool of 1308 research publications and narrowed it down to 109 primary
sources discussing migrating from a legacy system to an MSA-based system. Our first
research question focused on the primary research and, more specifically, looked into the
research strategy, publication year, and publication venue. The second research question
covered the specific area of research related to migrating from legacy systems to MSA.
Lastly, the third research question investigated the contributions of the research papers.
From the primary document analysis, we identified the following observations. Legacy
system to MSA migration research has increased from 2016 and reached a stable level
from 2018 onward. The amount of evaluation research suggests that the research field is
maturing. Another indication is that researchers in this field mostly target challenging
publication venues (conferences and journals). Related to the publication venues, we also
observed that there is major fragmentation in the publication forums, which suggests that
researchers approach the MSA migration process from multiple disciplines with differing
goals. This can make the research harder to find as it is scattered across many different
publication forums. Regarding the focus of the research (estimated with the horseshoe
model), we found that more studies focused on the transformation phase compared to
reverse engineering or forward engineering. Finally, the most common research contribution
type was a process.
The other trends identified from the literature include migration motivations: scalability,
maintainability, time to market, and adaptability to new technologies. We also note the
challenges observed in the research: that MSA is not a silver bullet solution for legacy
migrations, the decomposition of existing systems and identifying microservice candidates
from existing legacy systems, organizational challenges, decentralizing databases, the
migration of databases, and performance degradation during migration.
The MSA migration research is mature based on the publication venues and research
types utilized. The research field is scattered across many publication venues. There are
notable technical, managerial, and organizational challenges and differing motivations.
We have included our recommendations for future research in the discussion section. We
will continue conducting research in this field with survey and interview studies to study
industry practitioner’s challenges and motivations to understand the current problems and
pitfalls that affect the migration processes and the reverse engineering and re-engineering
tasks required.
Information about funding/support sources
We received no funding for this research.