Background: Nowadays, expensive, error-prone, expert-based evaluations are needed to identify and assess software process anti-patterns. Process artifacts cannot be automatically used to quantitatively analyze and train prediction models without exact ground truth. Aim: Develop a replicable methodology for organizational learning from process (anti-)pat- terns, demonstrating the mining of reliable ground truth and exploitation of process artifacts.
Method: We conduct an embedded case study to find manifestations of the Fire Drill anti-pattern in n = 15 projects. To ensure quality, three human experts agree. Their evaluation and the process' artifacts are utilized to establish a quantitative understanding and train a prediction model.
Results: Qualitative review shows many project issues. (i) Expert assessments consistently provide credible ground truth. (ii) Fire Drill phenomenological descriptions match project activity time (for example, development). (iii) Regression models trained on ˜ 12-25 examples are sufficiently stable.
Conclusion: The approach is data source-independent (source code or issue-tracking). It allows leveraging process artifacts for establishing additional phenomenon knowledge and training robust predictive models. The results indicate the aptness of the methodology for the identification of the Fire Drill and similar anti-pattern instances modeled using activities. Such identification could be used in post mortem process analysis supporting organizational learning for improving processes.
Keywords: Anti-Patterns, Fire-Drill, Case-study
1. Introduction
A pattern describes a reoccurring problem and its prototypical solution [2]. If the solution exac- erbates - rather than ameliorates - a problem, a pattern becomes an anti-pattern [3, 4]. There exist anti-patterns related to, e.g., software architecture, that have a palpable effect on product quality. Other types of anti-patterns that have negative repercussions on the process and the resulting product could be attributed to management malpractices [5, 6]. Nelson summarizes a number of infamous project failure examples, most of which are the result of ineffective project management practices. The overall project failure categories are people, technology, product, and process [7], of which we focus on the latter. The software process is characterized by certain activities, such as development (e.g., implementation of features and fixing of bugs) or requirements engineering. The quality of this process depends, among other factors, on an adequate allocation of time for carrying out each activity. The quality of a software product was demonstrated to be tied closely to the quality of the software process [8]. Halvorsen and Conradi [9] even suggest the causal relation Quality(Process) ? Quality(Product). Therefore, it is worth studying phenomena related to process quality, in order to understand and improve product quality. Project failure is a frequently embraced opportunity for post mortem organizational learning [10]. Failure can often be attributed to process anti-patterns, of which the so-called "Fire Drill" is a prominent example, due to its clearly discernible symptoms [11, 12]. It is often characterized by "months of monotony [...]" (unsatisfactory early project progress) that is "[...] followed by a crisis" [4], due to forcing immediate delivery [13]. The Fire Drill is one of many existing management anti-patterns known to exacerbate software processes fraught with problems [14]. Usage of such anti-patterns for organizational learning is inhibited by a variety of factors today. The most pronounced problem is perhaps the lack of a quantitative description: anti-patterns are only described qualitatively using, e.g., structured templates with elements such as causes, symptoms, or consequences [5]. This effectively constrains the available methods of analysis to qualitative assessments. The manual evaluation depends on experts knowledgeable and available in the problem domain [15]. The problem is further aggravated by the fact that qualitative assessment is labor-intensive and error-prone because experts are likely to introduce their own subjective bias [16]. Although software development processes produce a multitude of diverse digital artifacts either as a by-product (e.g., source code) or based on the use of project or application lifecycle manage- ment (ALM) tools, most of these data cannot facilitate anti-pattern instance detection [17]. Even though there exist approaches that take advantage of such artifacts by using more formal and technical models, or thresholds and rules, the scope of their utility is severely limited to single process aspects, such as progress, variable dependencies, or estimating uncertainty, e.g., [18-22]. Lastly, scarcely available historical data, that is, data on past projects, impede or prohibit comprehensive and generalizable learning that results in organizational knowledge. Many of the existing approaches have software process improvement as the ultimate goal. They first establish some white-box model and then analyze the effect of the measures implemented within the model boundaries [23, 24]. In contrast, we first conduct a longitu- dinal embedded case study [25, 26], which qualitatively evaluates the presence and severity (i.e., how strongly the phenomenon manifests) of a Fire Drill in n = 15 student projects collected over a period of three years, to find an accurate ground truth1. Through observer and data triangulation [29], as well as inter-rater reliability assessment [30], we ensure
1The feasibility of studies under similar constraints of scarce data have previously been successfully
conducted in, e.g., biomedical engineering [27] and material sciences [28].
a minimum quality of the observed evidence that makes the foundation for the ground truth as is required for further analyses [31]. The ground truth is then used to leverage previously unusable artifacts to establish quantitative measures and to derive knowledge. An adaptive training of a gray-/black-box model allows predicting the (severity of the) anti-pattern instances using the implemented measures [32]. Finally, the new insights are propagated back to the studied case. From the digital project artifacts, we can confidently derive the carried-out activities, such as adding features or engineering of requirements2. Then, the Fire Drill is modeled in terms of time spent on (temporal accumulations of) these activities. We learn that the phenomenon is sensitive to a certain balance of these activities, that is, how much time on each activity is spent in relation to any other activity, at any point in time. We argue that this is also the case for many related or similar phenomena. Therefore, next to the immediate contributions, the intended main contribution is the methodology that will allow full or partial replication of this study (using, e.g., different phenomena or modified contexts).
1.1. Data used in the study
Embedded case studies, such as the present one, are characterized by and rely on qualitative and quantitative data [35]. The study design is split to appropriately study either type of data. For the remainder of this work, we refer to these as type-I data and type-II data, respectively. Most data are produced in the development process and related to project plan- ning, application lifecycle management, version control, and documentation. As either type contains both qualitative and quantitative artifacts, we define the types of data as follows.
Type-I Data. In addition to archival records, this case study uses direct observations, memory logs, meeting minutes (e.g., from stand-ups, retrospectives, customer meetings, or iteration planning), participant observation, team experience reports, customer comments, mentors' assessment notes, and wikis (or other types of note collections) maintained by each team as primary data sources for the qualitative portion. These data are largely unstructured and were recorded mostly subjectively. The type-I archival data is treated as a set of distinct data sources; the production and extraction of information related to these sources are outside the scope of the research method in this study [29].
Type-II Data. For the quantitative part, this study mainly uses out-of-sample testing for performing model validation and generalization error estimation. The data is structured and comes from the archives of the ALM tools. It includes version control systems that hold the source code (and its commits) and raw data from the underlying issue-tracking tools. The latter are mostly tickets that have been assigned a category and time estimates. Although there is some uncertainty in these tickets, all other data used in the quantitative analysis were objectively recorded.
1.2. Objective
Clearly defined objectives are a common element of the research design for case studies [29]. We pursue a single, principal objective refined into research questions to which we offer some answers. For this case study, the principal objective is defined as follows. Automate the post mortem Fire Drill severity assessment, by utilizing the qualitatively won ground
There is a partial semantic overlap between our activities and the so-called disciplines as used in the
(Rational) Unified Process [33, 34].
truth and selected suitable quantitative, objective type-II artifacts. Pursuing this goal will necessarily result in the extraction and generation of knowledge from the type-II artifacts. The point of departure for the principal objective is one in which, before conducting the case study, we are relatively certain that the Fire Drill, given its existing phenomenological descriptions, is detectable and that some projects will exhibit one. Although this was the result of our pilot study (see Section 3.2), we are yet uncertain of the quality of the qualitative evaluation (whether severity can be determined sufficiently accurately). Although all data were available at the beginning of the study, that is, type-I and type-II data, we did not know if and how many of the type-II artifacts would be suitable for automated detection, implemented as a regression model. Also, manual facilitation of the type-II data is difficult, as the Fire Drill was not previously described from a quantitative perspective. Manual analysis of quantitative data is further inhibited by the data size (data points and dimensionality) and possibly non-linear correlations.
1.3. Propositions, hypotheses, research questions
In this section, we will guide the reader through the main aspects of the case by presenting three sets of propositions, hypotheses, and research questions in a consecutive manner. For case study research, it is suggested to align the methodology close to these elements (however, not necessarily in this order, e.g., [29, 36]). The If-Then-styled propositions first give potential implications, while the generated hypotheses provide structure and detail to the formulated research questions.
1.3.1. Understand the Fire Drill manifestation
The first set of propositions, hypotheses, and research questions concerns the manifestation of the Fire Drill in our context directly.
Pr. 1.1: If the Fire Drill phenomenon is described well enough and present in the projects, then manifestations of it can be found using type-I data only.
Pr. 1.2: If there is agreement between independent raters, then the existing phenomenolog- ical descriptions of the Fire Drill are sufficient for a qualitative post mortem evaluation. Pr. 1.3: If there is agreement on the absence of the Fire Drill in a project, then the evidence that is counter-indicative of the phenomenon (true negatives) can be gathered.
Hyp. 1.1: The type and quality of the type-I data allow for accurate assessment of the severity of the Fire Drill using qualitative evaluation.
Hyp. 1.2: Projects not affected by the Fire Drill can be used to derive common symptoms whose presence can indicate its absence.
RQ 1.1: Can the severity of the Fire Drill be accurately determined?
RQ 1.2: What is the nature of the Fire Drill manifestation in each of the student projects?
RQ 1.3: What evidence can be gathered indicating the absence of a Fire Drill?
1.3.2. Establish an understanding using qualitative data
The won ground truth now allows us to access, reason about, and leverage available quantitative data in an unprecedented way. The second set of propositions, hypotheses, and research questions was designed to establish a new quantitative understanding. Our approach here is characterized by instrumental motivation and nomothetic evaluation.
Sets two and three facilitate quantitative project data of the same structure across all     4
projects. While the focus is on the sub-unit of analysis, the projects are examined together (nomothetically), instead of individually.
   In the following, importance refers to the concept (and technique) of (determining) variable importance for the prediction of a dependent variable (here: severity) [37]. When the timeline of a project is subdivided into phases, then each feature (variable) is exclusively assigned to a single phase. Therefore, variable importance allows us to determine and compare the relative importance of each project phase by aggregating the importance of each feature.
Pr. 2.1: If a ground truth can be determined accurately enough, then it can be exploited for the analysis, interpretation, understanding, and comprehension of the quantitative data.
Hyp. 2.1: Activities closely related to those described by the Fire Drill will display characteristic behavior that is in accordance with the Fire Drill's phenomenological descriptions.
Hyp. 2.2: All project phases will exhibit non-zero importance, with the later phases being of greater importance (the Fire Drill, supposedly, is more critical towards the project end).
RQ 2.1: What are typical accumulations of (maintenance) activities characteristic of a Fire Drill?
RQ 2.2: What phases and activities are most important for predicting the presence or severity?
1.3.3. Obtain a robust predictive model
The last set of propositions, hypotheses, and research questions was designed primarily to achieve the main objective (see Section 1.2), namely to automate the post mortem severity assessment. As a by-product, we will also improve our quantitative understanding, as continued from the previous set. In the following, stability refers to two criteria simulta- neously, the first of which is the expected generalization error and the second of which is the confidence interval regarding the generalization error of a predictive model.
Pr. 3.1: If any type-II data (artifacts) are suitable, training should converge toward stability with increasing amounts of training data.
Pr. 3.2: If a stable model with acceptable generalization error can be obtained, then assessing the severity of the phenomenon with it could be instantaneous.
Hyp. 3.1: Type-I ground truth and type-II data from a few projects are apt for training a regression model with acceptable stability.
Hyp. 3.2: Using either source code or issue-tracking data should yield predictive models of similar stability, as the former is more objective, while the latter is more closely aligned with the Fire Drill's described activities.
RQ 3.1 What source of data, issue-tracking or source code, yields better models?
RQ 3.2: How many data points are required for obtaining a stable predictive model?
1.4. Notions and abbreviations
Activities use an all-caps sans serif font and are abbreviated by a few letters. For example, the activity development is denoted by DEV. It is also used as a subscript for functions
over time, that is, fDEV. Similarly, empirical observations, symptoms, and consequences	5
use few letters and a number, in typewriter font. For example, ESC01 is the first empirical observation of a symptom/consequence.
1.5. Structure of this article
The remainder of this article is structured as follows. The next Section, 2, introduces related and relevant work. Section 3 provides background information on phenomena described using a pattern language, with a dedicated focus on anti-patterns and the Fire Drill, as well as details about the preceding pilot study. The entire design of this study and the underlying methodology is presented in Section 4. It is followed by Section 5, which is dedicated to the presentation of the results of the analyses. The validity of our study, the limitations of its results, their replicability and generalizability, as well as a summary of the results obtained and how they relate to the established propositions and hypotheses, are discussed in Section 6. The conclusion and synthesis of all results related to the case studied, as well as prospects for future work, are given in Section 7.1. At the end of the article, the additional appendices A through E, providing supplementary details and insights, can be found.
2. Related work
Pattern-like phenomena related to management are not models because they only describe a well-known solution to some recurring problem [3], but effectively lack efficient operational- izability (in terms of, e.g., a predictive model for presence and/or severity). Simeckova et al. [5] have identified a wide semantic gap between the qualitative (textual, unstructured, and often ambiguous) and quantitative description of pattern-like phenomena, where the latter is practically impossible to specify. This is because patterns are deliberately left abstract (or even "vague", as Alexander et al. [2] put it). Therefore, a quantitative description would require, for example, context-specific thresholds or rules according to Simeckova et al.
    Currently, no software process improvement model that could adequately represent or evaluate the presence of a Fire Drill based on quantitative data exists. Brown et al. [11] started to characterize the Fire Drill anecdotally, describing the problem it portrays, together with a refactored solution called sheltering (see Section 3.1). They did not attempt to abstract from this, i.e., there is no list of symptoms, for example. The only possible form of operationalization would be a manual evaluation of whether and to what degree the own project matches their description. Although they do not use the example of a Fire Drill, Laplante and Neill [4] were the first to collect various managerial and cultural anti-patterns and to represent each in a common, structured template. It included, for example, the anti-pattern's central concept, its dysfunction, a short vignette, a plain explanation of the anti-pattern, clues to alleviate the fallout, and - most importantly - a yes/no checklist with symptoms for identifying the anti-pattern's presence. More recently, Picha and Brada [18] started to collect and consolidate anti-patterns in a common template. They extract and gather various characteristics from each anti-pattern and translate some of their peculiarities into actionable symptoms, consequences, and solutions. Attempts exist to operationalize various (anti-)patterns for software process quality. For example, next to the informal descriptions, there are more formal models, such as Bayesian (Belief) networks, ontologies, social networks, and Design structure matrices [6, 19-21]. Of these, only Bayesian networks are actionable to a limited extent, as they allow for modeling
conditional probability distributions and visualization of dependencies between variables.	6
The other methods are rather concerned with encoding project management knowledge into machine-readable form. The actionability in Bayesian networks is limited to assessing uncertainty; that is, it is not suitable for detecting the presence of anti-patterns but rather a tool for exploring relations [22]. However, they may be used to measure certain aspects of the process, such as its progress or quality.
   There is plenty of other research on quantifying software quality using ALM artifacts. For example, Draheim and Pekacki [38] focuses on developers' activity throughout the project using collaboration, productivity, and evolution metrics. Ramsauer et al. [39] deal with estimating the maintenance costs in software development, and Tamburri et al. [40] study the organizational aspects of software projects and communities. Talpová and Ctvrt- níková [41] use ALM data to investigate Scrum anti-patterns in a case study, though only as a secondary source of information combined with surveys and interviews. Ha- chemi [42] explores the reuse of patterns (in a more colloquial sense) in the modeling of software development processes. Although other researchers also focus on (anti-)patterns, they do not use ALM data. Frtala and Vranic [43] research organizational patterns and their adoption in individual organizations and projects using gamified learning techniques. Settas and Stamelos [20], as well as Stamelos [6] aim specifically at project management anti-patterns, their knowledge base, and effective communication using heterogeneity of personalities and character traits of developers. A major part of the research efforts also deals with the modeling of (anti-)patterns and detection through languages and ontologies [44], or models like the software process engineering meta-model [5] and the business process model and notation [45].
   To the best of our knowledge, no one has previously attempted to operationalize an anti-pattern using the approach presented in this study. It was previously shown that performing post mortems is a viable path to organizational learning [10] and that learning from anti-patterns is deemed a way to eventually master management knowledge [6]. Also, it appears that examining and learning from eventuated anti-patterns is not limited to the context of software development. For example, Awad et al. [46] use them to detect compliance violations of business processes. Lastly, the Fire Drill is a phenomenon that can lead to anything between ever-so-slight and severe, negative repercussions, such as total project failure. Studying project failure typically results in the discovery of many interrelated symptoms and consequences [47]. Although, compared to the application of common software process improvement models, we address only a single quality goal, we observe numerous different symptoms and consequences. It appears that the statement of Neill et al. [1] about the fruitfulness of studying project failure has become true.
3. Background
This section provides some background information about phenomena described using a pattern language, with a focus on the Fire Drill anti-pattern. It also gives an overview of previous work, that served as a pilot study.
3.1. Phenomena described using a pattern language
Generally, patterns are reoccurring and identifiable phenomena [2], that are especially preva- lent in phases of design, project management, and in software development processes [48].
A pattern provides a general and proven solution to a common problem.	7
"Each pattern describes a problem which occurs over and over again in our environment, and then describes the core of the solution to that problem, in such a way that you can use this solution a million times over, without ever doing it the same way twice." - Alexander et al.
However, as the definition by Alexander et al. [2] implies, the descriptions are deliberately left vague in order to leave room for case-specific applications of the solution the pattern represents. The definition also highlights the challenge of patterns to date, which lies in objectively definable and quantifiable problems, and the lack of technical and automated solutions to these. While efforts for a more technical way of describing patterns have been undertaken (e.g., [1, 11, 18]), they are predominantly described using a pattern language, structured text, or a template [6]. Therefore, patterns are most often not described quantitatively and lack clear connections to quantifiable properties, such as software metrics.
   Figure 1. Some common elements of patterns and anti-patterns. The context element refers to the context (and its problematic situation) of the case study itself (see Section 4.1)
   An anti-pattern can be conveyed as a larger concept than a pattern, in a way that it encompasses the elements of a pattern, but also adds an additional, so-called refactored solution [4]. The refactored solution is, for example, a restructured, improved, or otherwise optimized version of the original (regular) solution. The regular solution that comes from the enclosed pattern is what creates the anti-pattern in the first place because its application constitutes malpractice that exacerbates the problem, rather than ameliorating it (see Figure 1). Therefore, the actual mending solution is the refactored solution, rather than the regular solution. The refactored solution is an element that is known for some anti-patterns, but not for all. If present, it is commonly included in the pattern language or structured template (e.g., [14]). As a result, anti-pattern project management phenomena pose threats to project quality and delivery and are the outcome of human error. The ramifications include but are not limited to, developer churn, interpersonal and organizational tensions, a product of poor quality, delayed delivery, or even total project failure. The notion of an anti-pattern is, therefore, closely related to that of project risk [6].
3.1.1. The Fire Drill
The presence of a Fire Drill is a kind of problematic software project situation. Most recently, the Fire Drill was described following a common, structured template (see Appendix A).
Rudimentarily speaking, it is construed as a short, desperate, and highly active phase towards the end of a software development project. It is preceded by a considerably longer,
much less productive phase. Often, a disproportionately large amount of the project's resources is spent in the first phase, without advancing the project at the required pace. When management acknowledges the urgency of the imminent due date, the start of the typical Fire Drill is heralded [3, 11, 12].
   While the Fire Drill is a phenomenon that unfolds as the result of poor management during the development phase of a project, some projects are predestined to exhibit one due to poor time allocation for the preceding approval and budgeting processes. This phenomenon is known as the "fuzzy front end" and often results in an aggressive development schedule from the beginning [49].
3.1.2. Patterns related and similar to the Fire Drill
The Fire Drill is related to other phenomena, some of which it is partially indistinguishable from. This happens because a certain set of indicators and symptoms and consequences are similarly indicative of other phenomena. Some related anti-patterns are, for example, "Analysis Paralysis"3 (a potential cause) or "Collective Procrastination" [18] (a more generic case). Other anti-patterns, such as "Half Done is Enough"4, or "Brook's Law" [50] may constitute typical symptoms associated with an early-/late-stage Fire Drill. The anti-pattern "Cart Before the Horse" emerged as part of a Fire Drill in some of the affected projects. While it is a pattern of its own, it is a typical, severe, and frequently occurring symptom of a Fire Drill (see ESC2 and E20 in Appendix C), that may have high project risk as one of its consequences. What is furthermore similar, is that these phenomena, in theory, can also be identified based on the ALM data or ongoing activities.
3.2. Previous work
In an earlier paper that served as a pilot study [51] for this work, we primarily investigated the type-II data. Next to exploring and visualizing the work carried out in the projects, the goal was to assess whether a model or a plain decision rule for presence detection can be derived from the data and applied to future projects. That study did not include a qualitative evalua- tion of the Fire Drill in each of the projects. Furthermore, the absence of more than two raters prohibited a proper assessment of the inter-rater agreement and the quality of their findings. From the pilot study, we conclude that the usage of naive models, whether expert-designed or purely data-driven, is not beneficial, as a model requires a more adequate representation of its features. We attempt to represent the time spent on activities in two different ways. After exploring the data, we explicitly define three activities for issue-tracking that are related to requirements engineering, development, and descoping (see Section 4.5.1). For source code data, we predict the so-called maintenance activity [52] that is associated with each com- mit [53] (see Section 4.5.2). These activities are related to adding features, correcting faults, and perfective changes (e.g., maintenance). For each instance of an activity, it is always recorded when it happened. This allows us to detect temporal accumulations of compara- tively lower and higher density. In issue-tracking, we additionally have access to the duration (i.e., how much time was spent) of each recorded activity. The duration for commits, however, remains unknown. For issue-tracking data, we chose a cumulative and normalized represen- tation, since this data tends to be more scarce (for example, bug tickets are only opened
rarely). For source code data, we choose to represent the time spent as continuous-time random variables. We conclude that the latter representation is the most suitable for either type of data. Furthermore, we suggest using weighted density estimation for issue-tracking data, additionally considering the time spent as a weight for the temporal accumulations of these activities. We recommend using continuous probability densities also for another reason:It is straightforward to derive two kinds of features from them. First, a density can be integrated along an interval for estimating the relative amount that was carried out for an activity. Second, calculating a divergence between two densities is well understood and can be exploited for identifying disparities between activities. It is likely that common regression models (mind they require an accurate ground truth) will outperform the pilot study's approach using our findings. While a binary decision rule for presence detection can achieve a respectable accuracy, it is of obviously limited use as a severity assessment device and prone to producing false positives or negatives. Attempts to create a more fine-nuanced rule failed.
4. Case study design
We perform a single-case embedded case study based on intrinsic and instrumental mo- tivation. We use qualitative and quantitative data and present the results in a mostly structured format [26]. From Sjøberg [54, 55] we may understand "a case [...] as a single, empirical configuration of actors, activities, technologies, and artifacts, all within a context." However, while all projects do share the same case, their empirical configuration varies. This circumstance necessitates the application of an embedded design. For example, in each project, a different product is developed, by a different group of students, applying individual practices (to some degree) to achieve their goals (see Appendix B for the full project setup). Therefore, the multiplicity rather lies in the analysis units (the projects themselves) and not in the cases, requiring an embedded design. A non-embedded design, if not studying multiple cases, would be concerned with a single unit of analysis and, therefore, not be a suitable choice for this work. Embedded case studies propagate the findings from the analyzed units back to the single case studied. Yin [25] notes that the project-level data may be highly quantitative, and the original evaluation would become a project study, i.e., a multiple case study of different projects if there is no investigation at the level of the original case. Scholz and Tietje [26] note that the multiplicity of evidence in an embedded case study is investigated partly in the projects, each focusing on different and salient aspects of the original case. In a multiple case study, each case should serve a specific purpose within the general scope of the investigation, which does not apply here. Furthermore, all propositions, hypotheses, and research questions are the same across all embedded units. Therefore, we only have a single case of study [25].
   Multiple case studies follow a replication logic that starts with uncovering a significant finding that is subsequently replicated using additional case studies. However, our study is a single evaluation (concerning a single case) across multiple projects. The logical sub-units (or embedded units) are the selected n = 15 projects, which makes a holistic design inapplicable and warrants an embedded design instead. It is common for embedded case studies to facilitate (sampling of) quantitative data and the application of statistical analyses [35]. The case (subject, or main unit of analysis) is the Fire Drill within a software
engineering course (see Figure 2). The course is the Advanced Software Engineering course    10
at master level5 conducted during the second out of a four-semester study at the University of West Bohemia in Pilsen. Given the setup of the projects (e.g., agile, iterative, milestones, etc.), they are naturally subject to the Fire Drill phenomenon. The full context of our study is given in the next Subsection, 4.1.
   Since we perform an embedded case study in the realm of software engineering, our method is closely aligned with guidelines from Runeson et al. [29] and Wohlin et al. [56]. The research strategy chosen here is exploratory, explanatory, and of an improving nature. It is not descriptive, as we are not trying to portray the current state of the Fire Drill phenomenon [29] (for that, the interested reader is referred to Section 3.1.1, Appendix A, and [3, 11]). It is, however, exploratory and explanatory since we seek new insights into the phenomenon's manifestation within the chosen context. The case is studied to interpret and explain symptoms, causes, and consequences and establish a connection to quantitative data that cannot be fully utilized. This is closely connected with the improving nature of this study as we attempt to add to the current qualitative understanding and establish a new quantitative awareness.
   Wohlin and Rainer [55] provide a case study checklist. The first requirement is an identifiable case, which we have presented here. The second requirement is that of a real-life context. It is satisfied since we do not attempt to generalize beyond the chosen context (e.g., industrial). The third requirement is that of using multiple data collection methods. The variety of methods and sources used is described in Section 1.1. The fourth requirement is the study of a contemporary phenomenon. It is satisfied by us studying the projects as they occur. The last requirement is that the researchers do not act as change agents in the projects as they unfold. Although one of the raters was a mentor in most of the projects, that role was purely passive with respect to at least the Fire Drill phenomenon (see Section 4.1.3). This is evident because some projects showed strong manifestations of the phenomenon (or other anti-patterns) regardless. Furthermore, in software engineering, case studies are expected to establish long-term objective(s) (as opposed to action research that favors short-term change), which we did (see Section 1.3). We came to the characterization of our study as a single-case embedded case study, together with these properties, after discussing its nature and virtues in detail [57]. Although our analysis for the first part happened post mortem, we do not necessarily apply the full spectrum of software project post mortems. Therefore, we must separate ourselves from post mortems and processes as defined in, e.g., [58, 59]. Although our analysis partially resembles what Tiedeman describes as postmortem planning and design/verification, their conceptual framework is not applicable here for the above reasons.
   Case studies are "[...] studies of something general, and of something particular [...]" [60]. These two different moments are characterized by an idiographic and a nomothetic part. Therefore, this study is divided into two consecutive parts (see Sections 4.4 and 4.5). The first qualitative part seeks to gain an understanding of the Fire Drill's manifestation in student projects. Here, we make an individual, idiographic effort to understand the phenomenon in its context. This is also where we assign a severity to each project (the ground truth). The first part is closely aligned with the first set of propositions, hypotheses, and research questions as presented in Section 1.3. The motivation here is mainly of what Scholz and Tietje [26] call intrinsic character, meaning that we have a somewhat personal incentive to understand this case, as one of the authors has previously been involved in the conduct of these projects and will continue to be in the future.
4.1. Context
We report the context of this study aligned with the applicable points of the framework, as suggested by Petersen and Wohlin [61] and Runeson et al. [29]. Specifically, we report details on the products (what was manufactured in each project), processes (activities, artifacts), practices (tools and techniques), people (students and researchers), organizations (the university), and the (hypothetical) market (the customer). Appendix B lists, for each project, what kind of application was produced, its size, the used programming language(s), the number of team members, project duration in days, number of iterations and issues, time logged on issue-tracking activities, and number of commits per maintenance activity.
4.1.1. Product
Each team developed a single product over the course period, commissioned by the customer. Typically, an individual customer was assigned to each project. It is up to the customer's discretion to select an appropriate balance between product maturity and quality and the number of features. Typically, two-week iterations were used to ensure a certain minimum level of product completeness, quality, and installability.
4.1.2. Processes and practices
The goal of the projects is to approximate a real-world setting as closely as possible. The projects typically run for approximately three months, with a typical workload of ˜ 65-80 hours per student. Each project follows the Unified Software Development Process [33]. The methodology is influenced by agile practices, with two-week iterations ("Sprints") and a final fixed deadline for product delivery. The students manage the projects autonomously, with a staff member assigned to each project for oversight. For issue tracking and version control, teams must use common ALM tools, such as Redmine or GitHub. Most teams use additional tools, such as Wikis, automated testing and deployment (con- tinuous integration/delivery), or shared documents for, e.g., the requirements specification, implemented architecture, meeting minutes, or customer communication. We classify the
rich set of artifacts captured during the process into type-I and -II data (see Section 1.1).    12
4.1.3. Students, researchers, customers, and the organization
All students involved studied at the second cycle (master's level). The number of students in each project is shown in Appendix B. The customer for each project came either from the university (the same or another faculty) or an external company. Since the projects were conducted in an academic context, the organization was the University of Western Bohemia in Pilsen. Instead of monetary interests, however, the university's interests are ensuring high educational standards (especially by studying the outcomes), as well as preparing the students for a potential future work environment.
   Rater 1. The first rater is currently a doctoral student. Their main interest in the study is the detection of project management anti-patterns through the usage of ALM data. The first rater has about five years of industry experience working at DHL, predominantly with help and advice on using ALM tools (e.g., IBM Engineering Lifecycle Management) and consulting on software processes. They were previously involved in three process audits for industry, mining ground truth (quality of their processes or compliance to norms; using similar data plus interviews). These audits lasted for a few months, approximately one year, and one for approximately four years. The first rater worked as a mentor in the advanced software engineering course for nine consecutive years. On average, they were in charge of approximately five projects (with a range of three to eight). It is important to note that their mentor role is purely passive. They never actively attempted to avoid (or alleviate) the Fire Drill anti-pattern (or any other malpractice, for that matter). This becomes evident because some projects showed strong manifestations of the Fire Drill phenomenon (or other anti-patterns). The students could (and did) choose to ignore mentors' advice. Some students have previously failed the course.
   Rater 2. The second rater holds a master's in software engineering and did not previously participate in the course as a mentor. The second rater is a former doctoral student with a main focus on project data analysis. They have over three years of industry experience working at Unicorn6 as a project manager. Rater Two never had any active role in conducting the software engineering course.
   Rater 3. The third rater also holds a master's degree in software engineering. They were previously enrolled in a doctoral program for about four years. The main focus of their third-cycle studies was the compatibility of architecture components. With more than four years of industry experience, rater three works at the Finnish software company Yoso7, where the main customer is the Finnish state. Their role is that of an architect and a lead developer, as well as project analytics and -management (e.q., requirements analysis). They are also the head of the company's local branch in Pilsen. Rater Three never had any active role in conducting the software engineering course.
   Assessor. The assessor's role was to analyze, interpret, and aggregate the raters' findings independently. They are currently enrolled in a doctoral program and hold a licentiate degree. Their main focus of study is software and information quality, with a strong focus on statistical learning and mathematical optimization. The assessor has approximately four years of prior, predominantly agile industry experience, working as a systems developer (at SAP Research8), lead architect, project manager, and product 
also took similar roles as a teaching assistant in two unrelated first- and second-cycle agile software development courses over the course of three years (assuming a role in between two and eight projects simultaneously in each course). The assessor never had any active role in conducting the software engineering course.
4.2. Embedded unit selection
The natural choice for the (sub-)unit of study is student projects. We initially also considered studying the Fire Drill in open source or industrial projects, but this would probably have been a purely archival study due to the lack of a real-life context [54, 57]. Furthermore, the social context of open source projects is hardly observable, and the ALM data are notoriously incomplete or often absent entirely due to the absence of (proper) project management. The latter type of project is difficult to obtain, both in quantity and quality. Since the Fire Drill is a phenomenon that affects a project in its entirety, we regard quantity as slightly more important (for this reason, we conduct an embedded case study).
   The benefit of using the student projects to study our case lies in the accessibility of the associated ALM data throughout the entire lifecycle of each project. As course runners, we directly observe and record the day-to-day realities of each project. This additional data and knowledge are crucial for an accurate assessment of the ground truth. Our data spans 15 projects, four of which were conducted in 2019, five in 2020, and six in 2021, between March and June each year. We have previously detailed the various data types available for each project (see Section 1.1). We only included projects that provided full access to the ALM data. Therefore, a few projects had to be excluded. The non-availability of data can be primarily ascribed to the usage of external, proprietary ALM tools, sometimes demanded by industrial customers' non-disclosure requirements.
4.3. About the data
All data used in this study were previously made available as an anonymized open-access dataset [62]. It was used and made available only in digital form and was recorded exclusively digitally. All data are associated with application lifecycle management, that is, data related to application governance, development, and operations [63]. Therefore, most of the data are produced automatically by the required usage of ALM tools. The dataset includes all original artifacts for each project. To avoid introducing translation bias, textual artifacts recorded in Czech were kept pristine. The dataset also includes data collected by observation, such as mentor notes, meeting minutes, and retrospective records. The data was then digitized and added to the set.
   The immediate purpose of the data collection was evaluation and grading, and the data are initially kept for no specific reason other than archival records (the university recommends keeping such course-related data for administrative purposes). The data are also kept and accessed while the projects are still running because it needs to be accessible during or after it- eration reviews. Due to the absence of a specific reason, the recorded data are not specific to the Fire Drill phenomenon, as everything of potential relevance was kept or recorded. Therefore, the data can be used in a future study using a different case and/or research questions.
   Since the data stem from software engineering projects conducted at a Czech university, the projects' and their data are subject to Czech legislation. As for ethical considerations,
the legislation states that any student work done as a course assignment can be freely used   14
by the educational institution for the purposes of its main functions, research obviously being one of those.
4.4. Qualitative design
Approaching (anti-)patterns like the Fire Drill is first done through the available phe- nomenological descriptions. The multiplicity of evidence is first investigated qualitatively on a per-project basis. We draw on methods for data source- and observer-triangulation to obtain robust ground truth estimates [29, 64].
   The primary goal of the qualitative analysis was to understand if, how, and to what degree the Fire Drill manifests in each of the projects. To achieve this, the type-I data were subjected to manual and individual inspection by each of the three raters. Before individual analysis, a common understanding was established based on the available phenomenological descriptions (see Section 3.1) between the raters. The raters would then go ahead and extract evidence for the presence (and absence) of a Fire Drill (called the raters' notes in the dataset [62]). The notes reflect which symptoms and consequences are present, how severely they manifested, and how often they were observed. They also include findings that are counter-indicative of a Fire Drill. To date, the detection of (anti-)patterns has been subject to qualitative evaluation in practice.
   After a complete evaluation of a single project, a rater would then indicate an overall severity using a linear numeric rating scale of 0-10, where 0 indicates the absence of the phenomenon and 10 the strongest possible manifestation. This assessment would then serve as ground truth in the subsequent use of type-II data (e.g., variable importance, regression model, etc.). We chose to assess the severity on a project level, since a Fire Drill, according to its existing descriptions, concerns a project over its full lifecycle. Furthermore, the Fire Drill's descriptions prohibited the use of a proper ordinal rating scale, such as a descriptive, verbal rating, or Likert scale. This is because the described symptoms and consequences (see Appendix C) do not come with a severity attached. For example, the second symptom/consequence, SC2, reads "only analytical or documentational artifacts for a long time". Therefore, in the absence of a proper ordinal scale, the raters' subjective severity assessment formed only the basis for three subsequent analyzes.
   The first analysis is to measure inter-rater agreement. As the ground truth assessment of the raters is subjective, the only way to objectively measure the proportion to which they agree is to use some agreed-upon scale or benchmark. To calculate the inter-rater agreement between more than two raters, Cohen's Kappa cannot be used. Instead, for example, one of Conger's, Fleiss', or Gwet's Kappa coefficients is required. We chose to report Gwet's "AC1" Kappa coefficient, which outperforms other coefficients in terms of having reasonably small biases for estimating the true inter-rater reliability [66]. It is especially applicable in the presence of high agreement (which, as it turns out, is the case) because of its comparatively low bias. To benchmark the computed Kappa, we apply the widely used scale of Landis and Koch [67]. However, we should note that the proposed scale by Landis and Koch was arbitrarily chosen and that each Kappa is a point estimate associated with a probability distribution and a margin of error [68]. Therefore, it is recommended to properly benchmark the raw Kappa coefficients. Gwet suggests computing the probability that a Kappa falls into a certain range by integrating a standard normal distribution (where the Kappa coefficient is the mean and its associated error is the standard deviation) [30].
The second analysis was a common session between the raters conducted to reach
a consensus on their rating, using the well-established Wideband Delphi method [69, 70]. In    15
cases of diverging assessments, each rater presented arguments for their estimate, leading to a discussion, a repeated inspection, and a reconsideration of the information sources, until a final assessment was mutually agreed upon. Ties, rounding, and dissents were settled by the second rater since they never had any affiliation with the projects (e.g., as a mentor) and have the longest industry experience as a project manager to date. The raters were free to assign a final consensus value below or above their initial rating if there was sufficient reason to do so after the follow-up investigation of the data. The use of multiple experts is an effective measure to reduce subjective bias commonly introduced by expert-judgment software estimates [15]. The first two analyses were, in part, designed to guarantee a minimum quality of the obtained ground truth, as it is crucial for the analysis of the type-II data. Without the precautions implemented, robustness, reliability, and accuracy cannot be ensured otherwise [31].
   The third analysis is a systematic approach that uses a well-defined ordinal scale to identify the prevalence of individual symptoms and consequences. Unlike the previously used numeric severity rating scale, the ordinal scale used here is of descriptive nature. Although each consecutive item represents a severity higher than that of the previous item, a linear increase is not implied. Severity is assigned or upgraded purely by description. The assessor (see Section 4.1.3) is to first classify each of the raters' notes and comments according to this scale. Furthermore, the assessor is to assign each observed empirical instance to one of the Fire Drill symptoms and consequences. This is done to allow us to answer the question of how the fire drill manifests itself in the projects empirically. Some of the observations, even though they are clearly related to our understanding of the phenomenon, may warrant a new superordinate symptom and consequence, especially if they cannot be assigned purely or only poorly to any of the existing symptoms and consequences.
   After the first pass, a second pass is performed. In the second pass, observations (called empirical instances of a symptom or consequence and abbreviated as ESCxx) are conditionally aggregated and checked for data and/or observer triangulation, and the severity is adjusted accordingly. The following scale was used in both passes:
[0] None: Not at all a problem: it applies mostly to false positives (e.g., a typical symptom that was caused out of the studied context and had no adverse effects).
[1] Miniscule: Only slight indications of typical symptom(s) identified by at least one rater.
[2] Minor: Multiple indicators and/or measurable/documented symptom(s); seldomly corroborated by another rater.
[3] Moderate: Clearly identifiable and reoccurring symptoms or direct corroboration.
[4] Significant: Like moderate, but the higher severity is evident through additional data- or observer-triangulation.
[5] Serious: Agreement on the (recurrent) severe manifestation of a symptom by observer triangulation (often all raters) and/or data triangulation.
4.5. Quantitative design
The primary goal of the quantitative analysis was to facilitate the rich corpus of quantitative artifacts that are produced mostly automatically as a byproduct of conducting the projects and using the ALM tools. The goal is to enable quantitative data to contribute to the current phenomenological understanding and to automate expert-based post mortem assessment. The quantitative analyses facilitate the qualitatively won ground truth and
type-II data exclusively. The available type-II data can be split into two main sources:    16
source code and issue-tracking. This split is maintained throughout all analyses because, in reality, there might be access to only one of them. The won ground truth enables a wide range of statistical analyses and supervised learning. Quantitative data in the context of (anti)patterns are rarely useful. For example, consider the number of bugs over time. For this information to be useful, we would at least need some thresholds, and those would need to be universally valid. To address our objectives, hypotheses, and research questions, we also performed three analyses (Sections 4.6 through 4.8).
4.5.1. Activities in issue-tracking data
The Fire Drill and many related or similar phenomena are sensitive with regard to a certain balance of particular activities at any given point in time. For issue-tracking, we model three activities from the type-II data that, supposedly, are closely related to the activities described in the Fire Drill. These activities are as follows:
REQ: Activities related to requirements, analysis, and planning.
DEV: Time spent on development (implementation), testing, and bug-fixing activities.
DESC: Descoping; Effort that was planned for DEV, but never spent on it (i.e., the difference between the scope agreed on and delivered).
For each of the activities, the issue-tracking data provide timestamps (when an instance of the activity occurred) and duration. The title and description of the tickets were used to classify the issues into REQ and DEV, which were obvious choices to detect the Fire Drill. If there was only the slightest doubt, the issues were left uncategorized and not used. DEV reflects only adaptive engineering (i.e., adding features) because in these projects almost no maintenance activities are expected. Maintenance is only rarely done because there is no proper quality assurance and the delivery of agreed-upon requirements is of the greatest importance. Also, there are usually no or only a few ancillary functional requirements, such as response time, user-friendliness, or documentation artifacts. Therefore, activities other than forward engineering and bug-fixing were not considered. We also considered the frequency of the bugs, but it is unreliable because the reporting is not rigorous, often inconsistent, and sometimes completely absent. For example, many bugs were change requests in reality because the requirements were understood wrong. DESC, however, was constructed as it was deemed to be a valuable indicator for typical Fire Drill symptoms: Student projects have a hard deadline, so descoping happened frequently. The candidate solutions to a to-be-missed deadline are descoping, re-negotiation of the time frame, or overstraining people. Of these, descoping presents the refactored solution, while the others would exacerbate the situation. Therefore, descoping was the only allowed solution in this case.
4.5.2. Activities in source code data
From the source code, we model three types of activities from the type-II data as well. Source code is, compared to issue-tracking, a more objective source of information, because the data is not subject to human error and resulting inconsistencies (e.g., mislabeling of tickets). The source code repositories and commits thereof do not usually provide any form of annotations that would allow one to understand what kind of activity some committed work may relate to. Although it is possible to reference issues in commit messages, this feature was not used to label commits. Furthermore, we already derive three other activities from the tickets directly. By analyzing each commit's source code density [53], we can predict its associated maintenance activity [52] with great confidence. The three maintenance activities are as follows:
A: Activities related to adaptive/forward engineering (adding new features).
CP: Activities related to either corrective (fixing faults) or perfective (improve or change code to accommodate future features) work.
FREQnm: Overall commit frequency, regardless of the associated maintenance activity. While the used classifier can differentiate between corrective and perfective commits, the Fire Drill is not described using this distinction. Therefore, we combine these two activities into a single one. Although the overall commit frequency could be designed as a weighted mixture of A and CP, we chose not to do that. Instead, the frequency is designed by disregarding all labels, similar to CP, which does not make a distinction between corrective and perfective. Therefore, the variable is called FREQnm, where the suffix "nm" indicates a non-mixture. The association between maintenance activities and the activities as described by the Fire Drill is likely to be worse than it is for issue-tracking. However, the increased objectivity of the source code data may give an edge to these data over issue-tracking data.
4.5.3. Modeling of activities as probability densities
We have previously identified and selected activities to be modeled, for which a proper representation has to be chosen. As a single consistent representation, we model each activity as a probability density function (PDF). This is similar to how the work distribution for certain workflows in certain phases is represented in the rational unified process [34]. The density reflects the timely accumulation of activities relative to each project's lifecycle. Since we do post mortem evaluation, the time between the first and last instance across all activities can be used to normalize all occurrences' timestamps into the range [0, 1] after the project end. The temporal accumulation is estimated using kernel density estimation [71]. For both sources of data, source code and issue-tracking, we know the timestamp for which an instance of activity occurred. However, for the former, there is no indication as to the duration of each instance. For the latter, however, the duration of each instance is factored in as a relative weight when estimating a density, leading to a more accurate representation of the time spent.
4.5.4. Deriving features from activities
For each project, we have previously defined what activities we model and how. However, we have not yet derived any features. Generally, a feature is a measurable property with discriminatory power, which can be used in statistical analyses and machine learning. Since temporal accumulations of activities are modeled as probability densities (in case of issue-tracking also considering the duration using weighted estimation, see Sections 4.5.1 through 4.5.3), we choose two major types of features. The first type of feature is the amount (cumulative probability) of a certain activity that happens in a segment of a project. Its value can be determined by integrating the relevant interval of the activity's probability density. The second type of feature is the difference between any two activities on a segment that can be calculated using a (symmetric) divergence of their associated probability densities (denoted by the operator |0). In addition, we choose to subdivide each project into ten equally long segments. As the project time is normalized, we end up with a set of
segments {[0.0, 0.1], ..., [0.9, 1.0]}. The original Fire Drill description only vaguely indicates    18
(the length of) phases. Brown et al. [11] reports an anecdote of a typical project with improper burndown for about six months, followed by a Fire Drill of four weeks. However, this is in no way representative. Therefore, we choose said subdivision. We argue that ten segments will yield sufficient precision beyond Brown et al.'s two-phase model. Furthermore, the number of segments could be arbitrarily increased to further boost the precision, if desired.
   The amount ? of a certain activity ACT in a segment [a, b] is the integral of its associated probability density fACT over that interval. The probability densities of the activities are designed such that 1 fACT(x) dx = 1, i.e., they integrate to one, the cut-off beyond the actual project time is sharp, and the PDFs of any two activities provide absolute continuity. Therefore, [  ?i] = 1 (where i = 1 ... 10 is the segment index). The amount of a feature in a segment can be directly interpreted as a percentage (the cumulative probability of observing the related activity in the segment).
   The divergence between any two activities is commutative, that is, A diverges from B the same as B diverges from A. Therefore, a symmetric divergence is computed. The rationale behind this is rather practical. For the modeled activities, there is no distinction between the two mutual divergences. Furthermore, if A |0 B /= B |0 A, the result would be twice the number of features. For three activities A, B, C, the resulting set would have a cardinality of six. However, for a symmetric divergence, only A |0 B, A |0 C, and B |0 C need to be computed. We choose the Jensen-Shannon divergence [72], which is a symmetric divergence (1). It is based on the Kullback-Leibler divergence KL (P |0 Q). For two continuous random variables P, Q with probability densities p, q, the divergence is computed as follows.
   The rationale behind computing segment-wise divergences is our assumption that the Fire Drill is sensitive with regard to a certain balance of particular activities at any given point in time. Therefore, we regard the divergences as an effective measurable property for observing such (im-)balances. Unlike the amount of activity, the divergence between two activities cannot be interpreted in a straightforward way and requires normalization.
4.6. First analysis: weighted mixtures
The first analysis examines the temporal accumulation of activities as is typical for when a Fire Drill is present in a project. For that, a weighted mixture for each activity across all projects is created. A weighted mixture is a convex combination of probability densities. In such a combination, each weight is greater than or equal to zero and the sum of all weights is equal to one (2). This is required for probability densities to ensure that no probability can become negative and the mixture integrates to 1. Recall that the raters' ground truth assessment was recorded on a numeric linear rating scale of 0 - 10, with 0 indicating an absence of the phenomenon. The ground truth vector ? can, therefore, be
scaled into a weight vector by normalizing it through the division of its sum (3). A mixture   19
for some same activity ACT across all projects (4) is then created as a weighted sum (5).
L wi = 1 ? ? wi = 0 . . . properties of a convex combination,	(2)
w = ? IL ? 1-1 , the normalized ground truth,	(3)
fACT . . . vector of probability densities for activity ACT,	(4)
          gACT (x) =  wi fi(x), weighted mixture for activity ACT.	(5)
   The result of this analysis will show us, for each activity, how it typically unfolds over the lifecycle of a project that is affected by a Fire Drill. The expectation is to observe a correlation between these activities and those as described, thereby establishing an additional, symptomatic, and quantitative understanding of the phenomenon. Although we currently have only n = 15 projects, each project added to the mixture will lead to a more accurate representation of the activities in the presence of a Fire Drill. With a sufficient amount of projects added in the future, the weighted mixtures may become their own, quantitative pattern description of the Fire Drill.
4.7. Second analysis: variable importance
The second analysis estimates the variable importance. The term variable can be in- terchangeably used with feature. It does not refer to a random variable, however. The variable importance is often used as the basis for selecting features that shall be part of the training [37]. Here, we compute it for a different reason, though, that is to enrich the existing phenomenological descriptions from a quantitative point of view. The results of this analysis are not used for adaptive training. We should note that the variable importance is specific and sensitive to the model with which it was computed. For example, a neural network will estimate it differently than partial least squares. Therefore, we average the variable importance as obtained from five different models, each repeated 100 times, to get a more solid understanding. The five models used are a boosted generalized additive model [73], a neural network [74], (generalized linear) partial least squares [75], and bagged CART [76].
   In Section 4.5.4 we have described which and how we model activities, and what kind of features were engineered. To recall, two types of features, namely the amount of an activity and the (symmetric) divergence between two activities are used. Furthermore, the subdivision into ten equally long intervals was applied. In summary, for a single activity such as REQ or CP, the amount of activity in some segment is a single feature. Therefore, for either source of data (source code or issue-tracking), we modeled three activities each and segmented them into ten intervals, having two separate features (amount and divergence) per interval (2 × 3 × 10 × 2 = 120 ). Therefore, the second analysis will answer questions the first could not answer. For example, which are the most (least) important segments (or phases) of the phenomenon, or whether the balance/divergence of activities is a more suitable predictor than the number of activities. The variable importance, therefore, complements the weighted mixtures of each activity. It cannot, however, answer as to which source of data, source code or issue-tracking, is more important (that is, more apt to predict an accurate severity). That is because variable importance is estimated on either
data source exclusively, as we maintain the split.
4.8. Adaptive training
The adaptive training, while also having analytical properties, is in direct correspondence with the main objective of this study: To automate the post mortem severity assessment. As a byproduct, we shall also learn, for example, whether and which source of data, source code or issue-tracking, is apt for use in a predictive model or what type of model works best. The design of the adaptive training is subject to the propositions that a ground truth with sufficient precision can be obtained (Pr. 2.1), and that there exist some artifacts among the type-II data suitable for (adaptive) training (Pr. 3.1). We define the adaptive training to be a kind of stability analysis, a process to which training data is continuously added until the chosen stability criterion of sufficient confidence is satisfied [32]. The two principal quantities that we will consider are the empirical generalization error or risk, R, and the confidence in obtaining predictions close to it.
4.8.1. Notations
We use notations very similar to those of Bousquet and Elisseeff [32]. Only symmetric (ag- nostic w.r.t. the order of the training samples) learning algorithms that produce a mapping from some input or feature space X ? R to some output space Y ? R are considered. All training is supervised. Hence, a training set S (6) consists of m tuples in Z = X × Y, drawn
i.i.d. from the unknown population D. An algorithm A, once fit, becomes the hypothesis f : X ? Y. Therefore, it is a function from Zm into the hypothesis space F ? YX . We use the notation AS to indicate that A was trained on S.
S = {z1 = (x1, y1), ... , zm = (xm, ym)} ,	(6)
c : Y × Y ? R+ ? {0},	(7)
f(f, z) = c(f (x), y).	(8)
   The goodness of a fitted algorithm is evaluated using a cost function (7), which quantifies the difference between the true and predicted outcome. The loss of a fitted algorithm (a hypothesis f ) with respect to an example z = (x, y) is defined as in (8).
4.8.2. Stability analysis
The stability criterion chosen for a learning algorithm depends on the goal. In this study, the goal of the stability analysis is two-fold:
1. Select a champion model by the lowest empirical risk, among various configurations of learning algorithm, training data source, applied pre-processing, and used feature types.
2. Approximate empirical confidence intervals based on the probability that the champion model will predict an error that deviates from its expected error.
For (A), we require a model that satisfies the principal objective of predicting the severity of the Fire Drill on previously unseen projects with sufficient confidence. For that, we intend to repeatedly evaluate a large grid of various dimensions, in order to obtain robust estimates for the empirical generalization error for each setup (e.g., used model type, data source, etc.).
   Instead of setting a threshold for what constitutes sufficient confidence, we select to tie the second goal, (B), to the amount of available ground truth once a champion was
found since this is a source of actual scarcity. From pursuing the first goal, (A), the many   21
repetitions for each constellation resulted in a set of validation errors. This set is regarded as a separate random variable, V . Using this notion, a confidence interval can take two possible forms. The first is to express it in terms of a probability that the model estimates an error that deviates less or more from the expectation, given some bounds for the lower (da) and upper (db) deviation (9). The second is to express it in terms of a deviation that corresponds to a given lower/upper probability (pa, pb), that is, given a probability, a function that indicates the maximally expected deviation from the expectation in either direction (10). We can conveniently express the two notions using the probability density function (PDF), cumulative distribution function (CDF), and percent-point function (PPF) of V .
fV , FV , f -1 . . . PDF, CDF, and PPF of V,
µV = E [V ] =
x fV (x) dx, the expectation of V,
-8
g(da, db) = FV (db + µV ) - FV (µV - da),	(9)
h(pa, pb) = sup { µV - f -1 (FV (µV ) - pa)  ,  FV (µV ) - f -1 (µV + pb)  .	(10)
   When V follows a unimodal distribution, common inequalities can be applied to estimate a confidence interval. For example, if V ~ N , the Three-Sigma rule [77] can be applied. The following four common inequalities are ordered by their bounds, from tightest to loosest: Three-sigma rule < Vysochanskij-Petunin inequality < Gauss's inequality < Chebyshev's inequality [78-80]. If any of these should be applied, one shall first evaluate the tightest inequality for which the constraints are satisfied.
4.8.3. Training flow and model selection
The design of the training flow follows recommendations to obtain robust predictive models under the constraints of small sample sizes as given by, e.g., [81-84]. Varma and Simon and especially Vabalas et al. show that standard K-fold cross-validation (CV) produces strongly biased performance estimates, particularly with small sample sizes. This problem can be evaded by using some form of nested CV, train/test split approaches, and sufficiently many repeats. Using this approach, others have previously obtained high-performing models [85]. Due to the scarcity of our data, we oversample the dataset using the well-established synthetic minority oversampling technique (SMOTE) for regression, which has been proven to significantly increase model performance [86]. For the outer resampling of the nested CV, we define an extensive search grid. The dimensions are the following (the size of each dimension is in parentheses):
- (2) types of data source: either source code or issue-tracking.
- (6) types of models, one of bagged CART, generalized linear model [87], Gradient Boost- ing Machine [88], neural network, Random forest [89], and Support vector machine [90].
- (3) types of features used in training: Amount, divergence, or both (see Section 4.5.4).
- (2) conditionally apply pre-processing in the form of principal component analysis (PCA), in order to test a lower-dimensional input space X I.
- (49) number of training samples (using between two and 50 samples for training).
- (50) repeats using a deterministically randomized dataset.
During each of the 50 repetitions, the entire data set is shuffled. Then, a number of training samples (m) are removed without replacement, which constitutes the training dataset S = {z1, ..., zm}. Then, a constant number of 50 validation samples is selected from the rest of the dataset. These samples are completely excluded from any training and only used to estimate the validation error using the root-mean-square error (RMSE) as a loss functional f (8). The pre-processing pipeline consists of three steps: Removal of (near-)zero variance predictors, conditionally reducing dimensionality using PCA, and z-standardization of the data (center and scale). The pipeline is fitted to the training data and then applied to the validation data.
   The above grid has 176, 400 permutations. For each, a nested inner CV is performed. The empirical risk estimator used in the nested CV is the so-called leave-one-out cross-validation (LOOCV) [91]. It trains on all but the i-th instance of the training data. Therefore, it estimates the stability with respect to changes in the training set. This process shall be repeated for every i ? {1, ... , m} item in S, such that S\i is the training set without that item (11). The associated Rloo estimator is the average over all m possible constellations of S (12). It is known as the estimator of error stability, which is used as a measure of the difference between true and empirical generalization error [92]. Since the training here uses all but one data point during LOOCV training, it should be noted that the empirical estimate of the generalization error has a slightly pessimistic bias [81].
   The inner CV is repeated for a fixed number of 25 folds during which a nested CV is performed for each. Each m-th estimate during LOOCV in addition is found by conducting a nested grid search for optimal model-specific hyperparameters, which typically span between 1e1 and 1e3 permutations. For the models gbm and nnet, fine-tuned grids and fewer inner repeats are used. The many-times repeated training allows us to approximate the probability density of V, its expectation E [V ], and its associated confidence intervals.
5. Analysis and results
In this section, we report the results of the qualitative and quantitative analyses. Those results, their validity, and limitations are then further discussed in Section 6. The reported results represent our main findings and are those primarily relevant to the posed research questions. The results here are presented in the same order as the relevant methodology: First, we demonstrate results related to the qualitative evaluation. Then, results obtained quantitatively are shown from Section 5.4 and onwards. The interested reader is directed to an extensive technical report with numerous additional results that extend far beyond the scope of this study [78].
5.1. Inter-rater reliability and consensus
Prior to conducting a session for finding a consensus, we assessed the inter-rater agreement.
This was done by first computing Gwet's agreement coefficients AC1/AC2 [66] and then	23
benchmarking it against the scale as suggested by Landis and Koch [67]. Gwet's coefficient results in a percent agreement of ˜ 86.2%, a by-chance percent agreement of ˜ 56.8% (which it corrects for), an agreement coefficient (Kappa) of ˜ 0.681, a standard error (deviation) of ˜ 0.072, and a p-value of ˜ 2e-7. The p-value indicates, under any common significance level, that there is no practical corroboration for the null hypothesis of the inter-rater agreement test that the raters' agreement happened purely by chance. Instead, we accept its alternative hypothesis that chance did not cause the observed agreement [93]. According to the computed benchmark, the agreement is, for the largest portion of ˜ 82.18%, "substantial" [67]. Another ˜ 12.88% of the agreement is "moderate", and some of it (˜ 4.94%) is even regarded as "almost perfect." This is visualized in Figure 3.
   Assessing inter-rater agreement addresses RQ 1.1 directly. The computed benchmark indicates that most of the agreement is substantial. However, in order to solidify our answer, we also compute the benchmarks of Cicchetti and Sparrow [94], Fleiss [95], and Regier et al. [96]. Note that the latter uses the same (positive) levels as the benchmark by Landis and Koch, but only changes the labels (from "Moderate" to "Fair", from "Substantial" to "Very Good", and from "Almost Perfect" to "Excellent"). For Cicchetti and Sparrow's benchmark, the agreement is "Fair" ([0.4, 0.6] ˜ 12.88%), "Good" ([0.6, 0.75] ˜ 70.14%), and "Excellent" ([0.75, 1.0] ˜ 16.98%). For Fleiss's benchmark, the agreement is "Intermediate to Good" ([0.4, 0.75] ˜ 83.02%), as well as "Excellent" ([0.75, 1] ˜ 16.98%).
Finding a consensus is different from only applying, say, a weighted average. While
there was close or full agreement in many cases between the raters, some cases warranted for a common, retrospective inspection of the projects' artifacts, which led to ratings that were sometimes outside the range of the individual assessment. Most often, however, the raters were able to settle on one of the proposed ratings or a neighboring value.
5.2. Phenomenon prevalence and manifestation
Here, we report the summarized results of how the Fire Drill manifests across the projects,
in terms of concretely observed empirical instances of certain symptoms and consequences.	24
Those results address RQ 1.2 and were obtained by systematically analyzing the raters' notes. The most recent phenomenological descriptions of the Fire Drill define seven super- categories for symptoms and consequences (see Appendix A). We refer to them using the notions SC1 through SC7. The qualitative evaluation led to us defining three additional supercategories. Since these were derived from empirical observations, we refer to them as ESC1, ESC2, and ESC3 (see Appendix C). An observation was only logged if the rater's notes allowed it. For example, some notes indicate a problem, without a cause: "descope in later stages of the project," or "poor testing". Here, we cannot assign an instance of a symptom/consequence. Also, if the severity cannot be decided between two levels, then the rater's Fire Drill severity is applied to reach a decision.
   We should note that, due to the nature of the definition of SC7, no instances of it were found. Its description would affect a project rather globally. However, some of SC[1-6], as well as ESC[1-3] convey the portrayed problematic of SC7 in parts, so that findings were assigned to these instead. During the evaluation of the raters' notes, many instances emerged that could have been assigned to the original symptoms and consequences SC[1-7]. However, it became apparent that a new supercategory would perhaps be more suitable for many instances. Therefore, we introduced the notion of ESC[1-3]. Those reflect poor communication, high project risk, and poor usage of project management tools and methodologies, respectively. ESC[1-3] are not supposed to become part of the Fire Drill description. Rather, they were introduced for a more fine-grained assignment of observations to superordinated symptoms and consequences. Therefore, any observation assigned to ESC[1-3] could as well be assigned to the original symptoms and consequences. Qualitative evaluation. Our findings indicate that the most reoccurring problem is high project risk (ESC2). It is closely followed by poor communication (ESC1) and a compromised project schedule or scope (SC6). The most infrequently observed problems (apart from SC7) are a spike of development efforts towards project end (SC3), the absence of sufficient quality assurance and project tracking during development (SC4), as well as the delivery of only analytical/documentational artifacts over a (too) long period (SC2).
   Project risk (ESC2) is the most diverse supercategory, that is, it has the most different types of empirical observations by far (11). Risks are sometimes highly connected and emerge consecutively, such that the consequence of one problem is the symptom of the next problem. For example, an imbalance of activities (e.g., time spent on development when it had been required on requirements analysis instead) often leads to descoping, which itself caused frequent project schedule adaptations or quality regressions. Many problems can be attributed to the lack of (professional) experience in students, such as the misestimation of work items, technical difficulties (e.g., development environment, infrastructure, etc.), improper self-organization, or the (unwitting) misinterpretation of business requirements. However, not all problems were caused by students. For example, the customer representative was sometimes not available at the required capacity, thwarting the team. In other cases, the customer did not understand the technical challenges involved, which led to, e.g., unrealistic expectations or greatly diverging effort estimations.
   While observations of the second-largest problem, poor communication (ESC1), could be attributed in many cases to project risk, many problems would go underappreciated if doing so. The most frequent observation was an unresponsive customer or unsatisfactory communication. It would often manifest through delayed, slow, or incomplete responses. Sometimes, critical material, decisions, or information were imparted too late, causing other problems, such as a stalled team or compromised schedule. This observation is perhaps the
most prominent for one of the root causes of a Fire Drill: management stalls development.   25
Poor communication can be mutual, that is, between parties, or be caused by just one party. Most of the problems can be attributed to the mutual category. However, there are also instances of students not renegotiating misunderstandings and of customers interfering with the students' project management without telling them.
   The third-largest problem, a compromised project schedule or scope (SC6), had three different manifestations that were observed multiple times, both in the same project as well as across projects. Most often the schedule was compromised because the students accepted change requests, the re-prioritization of existing issues, or the addition of new issues in the middle of an iteration. This situation was often exacerbated by an improper change management process. The second-most frequent observation for this problem was that work was not completed as planned and the dragging of issues into the next iteration. The reasons for these observations were multifarious, such as an over-challenged team, misestimation, or unequal work distribution. Related to this observation, but still distinct from it, is that the team gets used to and regularly accepts doing overtime (and prolongs an iteration) or truncates scope (planned work).
   As for problems of the remaining symptoms and consequences, the most frequent observations were related to a slow project startup (SC1), especially with regard to non- developmental activities. This was most often related to a familiarization process needed by the new team, such as familiarization with the other members, new or changed tools, ways of communication, or yet-to-be-improved early-stage procedures. Another common cause was an unclear scope, such that the team went into procrastination (underscoped) or did have a hard time finding their way into the project (overscoped). ESC3, the poor usage of project management tools and related methodologies, constituted the next bigger class of symptoms and consequences. Typical problems are attributed to the improper usage of ALM tools, such as using wrong item types (e.g., marking an Epic as a Task), not breaking down large deliverables and features, or careless and imprecise logging leading to a discrepancy between logged and done work. The teams were allowed to use additional tools for information and knowledge management, which led to confusion and unnecessary duplication. Lastly, SC5 concerns the final product, its quality, and delivery date. The quality was compromised in some cases by skipping over planned features or proper quality assurance. In some cases, the product was completed but delivered only after the final due date.
   The refactored solution to a Fire Drill includes measures applicable for when there is time (iterations) and resources left. While some projects showed increasingly stronger signs of the phenomenon, no intermittent measures were implemented to alleviate the problems. It was only towards the very end that a solution had to be found. This is attributed to our context: While there are deliverables after each iteration, the customer is primarily interested in the final product, as feature-complete as possible. The students are primarily interested in passing the course, concentrating their focus on the final delivery, too. Refactored solutions to ameliorate an eventuated late-stage Fire Drill are to re-negotiate the delivery date, to triage the remaining budget into implementing missing features and quality assurance, or to descope. Due to the lack of monetary interests (and related pressure) on the customer's side and the impossibility of changing the delivery date (constraint of the context), the Fire Drill manifested predominantly through descoping, which proved to be a valuable predictor later.
Quantitative evaluation. We report on the average severity for each symptom and consequence, as well as on the total severity. The utility of the average severity is a ranking of the supercategories, that is, to determine what the common severity of the manifestation
for each superordinate category is. The total severity is the sum of the observations' severity.    26
Average severity per symptom and consequence.
Its utility is more specific for learning for our concrete case, as it should give an indication as to which symptom and consequence is the most pronounced in our projects.
   Figure 4 shows the average severity per symptom and consequence. SC[2-5] have only a single or few observations, which should be considered when ordering supercategories. SC1 and SC6 make for a good comparison, for example. While both have similarly many observations, the latter has a significantly stronger average severity. Encountering instances of either symptom and consequence might be similarly likely, but an observation of the latter indicates a worse case of a Fire Drill. The strongest average severity is exhibited by ESC1 (disregarding SC3 and SC5 which have only a few observations) with a value of ˜ 2.78. Recall that a value of 3 corresponds to the ordinal level "Moderate" (see Section 4.4), which is characterized as clearly identifiable and reoccurring symptoms or direct corroboration. Since its average severity exceeds that of SC6, the poor communication between stakeholders comparatively appears to be the worst of all the problems in our case.
   This impression slightly shifts towards ESC2 when looking at the total observed severity (see Figure 5). Ten more instances (28 total) were observed of ESC2, which explains its high total severity. In other words, while poor communication is comparatively worse when it happens, the projects were substantially more often subject to some form of risk. A third, quite evident problem is a compromised schedule or scope (SC6). By a larger margin, this is followed by problems related to a longer stall during the project beginning (SC1), a final product with low quality (SC5), and poor usage of ALM tools (ESC3). The low count of observations for SC[2-5] also results in a comparatively low total severity.
5.3. Phenomenon absence
The evaluation of the raters' notes also exhibited evidence for the absence of a Fire Drill
for a number of projects. In Appendix D, we have gathered a list of observed symptoms	27
Total severity per symptom and consequence.
Figure 5. Total severity for each (empirical) symptom/consequence.
Also shown is the number of observed instances in parentheses
and consequences in order to answer RQ 1.3. This list is comprised of symptoms and consequences that are counter-indicative to what constitutes a Fire Drill. While the absence of evidence is not evidence of absence, the gathered items should be more regarded as true negatives. This list does not claim to be complete, nor is the presence of a single item (or few) sufficient proof for the phenomenon's absence. On the contrary, evaluation of the raters' notes indicates that a project may exhibit symptoms and consequences for and against a Fire Drill, even simultaneously. For example, communication and collaboration with the customer might be seamless (as indicated by the counter-indicative symptom and consequence CISC01), but the project's schedule might still get compromised due to misestimation caused by inexperience. Sometimes, there are also signs for the opposite of a Fire Drill (or other patterns). Our main observation here is essentially related to an underchallenged or underutilized team, and often related to the quick completion of work items, delivery before the deadline, a too-simple product, or skipping over quality assurance or planning and/or analysis with the direct start of implementation.
5.4. Quantitative phenomenon manifestation
The previously won ground truth allows leveraging the quantitative type-II data. With each project having a severity attached, we can find typical accumulations of (maintenance) activ- ities that are characteristic of a Fire Drill (RQ 2.1). Figure 6 shows, for each activity as it is found in source code and issue-tracking data, a weighted mixture (convex combination (2) using the ground truth as weight). Three out of 15 projects had a ground truth consensus of 0 and, therefore, do not contribute to any of the weighted mixtures. Another effect of this circumstance is that the weighted mixtures quite obviously mirror the activities from a few, severely affected projects. Since each activity's mixture is an ordinary probability distribution (with integral = 1), we can compare them in a straightforward manner.
Source code. The activities in the source code are derived from maintenance activities (adaptive ~ A, corrective+perfective ~ CP) [52]. The overall commit frequency, regardless of the associated activity, is depicted as FREQ. Adaptive activities show a somewhat slow
start, followed by a peak in the third quarter of the project, and a sharp decline afterward.   28
To some degree, A follows the expectations according to the Fire Drill's phenomenological descriptions. CP and FREQ on the other hand, steadily increase for the first ˜ 80% of the project, only to peak shortly after at about ˜ 90% of the project time. The combined behavior of A and CP is counter-intuitive to the expected behavior of these activities, as per the Fire Drill's phenomenological descriptions (i.e., a significant increase of adaptive activities with a simultaneous decrease in corrective+perfective activities). FREQ, on the other hand, distinctively shows the expected peak of a Fire Drill towards the project end. Issue-tracking. The issue-tracking activities provide us with an additional quantitative perspective. Due to the nature of the projects, DEV is expected to only reflect adaptive engineering, similar to source code's A. The qualitative evaluation confirms this expectation, because corrective and perfective activities were rarely, if at all, logged in the project management tools. Indeed, we observe a quite similar temporal accumulation between A and DEV, with a peak in the third quarter as well. More or less inversely proportional to DEV is the accumulation of activities as captured by REQ. Both of these activities are in accordance with the existing phenomenological descriptions, such as an imbalance where in the beginning of a project activities connected to requirements, analysis, and planning prevail, while development is thwarted for one or the other reason. Approximately uniform distributions for these two activities would be asymptomatic for a Fire Drill in the ideal case. The descoping activity DESC was designed by us based on the assumptions that it would make for a good predictor of the Fire Drill. We observe that this activity steadily - in fact almost linearly - accumulates from project start to end. This indicates that affected projects are subject to descoping from the beginning and that these projects do not manage to remedy this situation.
5.5. Variable importance
Another question we sought to answer quantitatively using type-II data was about the importance of activities and project phases for accurately predicting the phenomenon severity (RQ 2.2). For that, we subdivided the normalized relative project time into ten	29
equally long, consecutive segments (see Section 4.5.3). Figure 7 shows a graphical result of this. The exact numeric results as shown in the figure are included in Tables E1 and E2, which are to be found in Appendix E. Looking at the final numbers, we can say that the divergence features have greater variable importance than the amount features, both for source code (˜ 52.5%) and even more so for issue-tracking (˜ 56.2%). The two most important features for either data source are A |0 CP (19%) and REQ |0 DESC (˜ 20.7%). The two least important ones are A (˜ 14.2%) and REQ (˜ 13%).
As for the per-segment importance, the results diverge between data sources, with
a larger variance for source code. There, it ranges from ˜ 6.2% to ˜ 15.3%, with a standard deviation of ˜ 3.3%. The first five segments, that is, the first half of the project, account for ˜ 55.9% of all importance, where segments three and four seem to be particularly important. Interestingly, segments seven, nine, and ten exhibit a comparatively low variable importance for predicting phenomenon severity. The range for issue-tracking data is from
˜ 5.2% to ˜ 13.5%, with a lower standard deviation of ˜ 2.3%. Both project halves are equally important when using issue-tracking data. Except for segments seven and nine, each segment is almost equally important.
5.6. Adaptive training
The third set of results is related to the third set of propositions and hypotheses and addresses the research questions therein. According to the previously described methodology (see Section 4.8), we conduct the adaptive training, using a large number of constellations and repeats in order to obtain robust estimates. We find that models trained using source code data converge faster and result in a lower final training error (answer to RQ 3.1), that not reducing dimensionality using PCA works better for a slight majority of cases, and that using both kinds of features simultaneously leads to robust convergence. Figure 8 shows the
distribution of validation errors for all six models when trained on 20 instances. When we   30
Distribution of validation errors for all six models, each trained on 20 instances.
Figure 9. Continuous confidence of the neural network predictor, with regard to the number of training instances. Shown are the values according to the 68-95-99.7%-rule
(assuming a normal distribution for every generalization error).
The mean RMSE was determined using 50 models' predictions on validation data.
The three color gradients correspond to the three sigmas
compare the data sources, models trained on source code achieve a lower mean (0.75/0.92), median (0.52/0.71), minimum (0.152/0.158), and standard deviation (0.58/0.65) for the validation RMSE error, summarized across all the different constellations.
   The champion model is a standard feed-forward neural network that uses divergence features from source code only. This is also reflected in Figure 8, however, here it is only   31
shown for 20 instances. The full adaptive training of the champion model is shown in Figure 9. The many observed validation errors obtained through the numerous repeats are almost always normally distributed, indicating the robustness of the final model. That also allowed us to apply the Three Sigma rule (which has the tightest bounds) to determine a confidence interval per number of training instances and to find some answers to RQ 3.2. Most notably, training the champion model on 25 instances produces an expected validation error of ˜0.46, and this error will not be larger than ˜0.96 by a probability of 99.7%10. In other words, such a model will predict the Fire Drill severity on a scale of 0-10, and by doing so it will almost surely not deviate by more than one point on this scale (the expected deviation is even less than 0.5). The expected RMSE falls below 1.0 for the first time when trained on twelve instances. For 15 instances, the probability that the prediction will be off by maximally 1 is already at =76%, as can be seen from the figure. For 20 instances, this probability increases towards =92%. For 50 instances, the expected error plus deviation is
0.52 or less, by a probability of 99.7%.
6. Discussion
In this section, we first summarize all results and relate them to the previously established propositions and hypotheses. We then discuss the validity of our study and its results, its limitations, and address replicability and generalizability.
6.1. Summary of the results
We have shown that experts can independently agree on a subjectively chosen rating and that their agreement was substantial and did not occur by chance. This was the basis for the propositions Pr. 1.1 and Pr. 1.2. The existing phenomenological descriptions of Fire Drill are sufficiently precise, and its severity can be accurately determined. It also confirmed the hypothesis Hyp. 1.1 that the mostly unstructured type-I data provide sufficient quality for the assessment task. The agreement on the absence was also reliable (Pr. 1.3 and Hyp. 1.2) so we were able to gather a list of counter-indicative symptoms and consequences. Most notably, however, the qualitative assessment and the following quantitative evaluation of the Fire Drill's manifestation allowed us to identify the most pronounced and prevalent symptoms and consequences in the considered projects. We find prime examples of reoccurring Fire Drill elements across our projects, such as instances of (chains of) project risk, poor stakeholder communication, and regressions in the form of descoping and compromised schedules. The circumstances and constraints of the studied context allow us to deduce explanations for the concrete manifestation.
   For the first quantitative analysis, we compose a weighted average of how activities typical for a Fire Drill-affected project accumulate. It is deemed an appropriate represen- tation since we previously confirmed hypothesis Hyp. 2.1, that is, activities will display a behavior characteristic of or conforming to the Fire Drill's phenomenological descriptions. These allow us to establish an additional quantitative understanding of the phenomenon. We take advantage of the wide range of digital artifacts and reliable ground truth to do so (Pr. 2.1). The weighted mixtures unveiled some unexpected results, which are, however,
10While these and the following results can be seen in Figure 9, they are calculated exactly using the
previously introduced notions for probabilities (9) and deviations (10) of confidence intervals, respectively.	32
explained by the confines of the studied context and case and corroborated by findings from our qualitative analysis. Late-stage Fire Drills were most often addressed by descoping, which is a valid - here the only valid - refactored solution. This is reflected quite well in the activities found in the source code. Instead of rushing to add the last missing features, the focus is predominantly on corrective activities and then on perfective activities. We know this from decomposing CP into its separate activities. While the Fire Drill description to date does not differentiate between corrective (C) and perfective (P), using source code allowed us to gain this insight. This is surprising since the delivery of agreed-upon requirements is deliberately prioritized over maintenance in these projects. An explanation for this might be that it became apparent in some of these projects that some form of compromise of scope is inevitable, so the efforts were likely re-focused on ensuring that a minimum quality corresponding to the requirements, for the to-date existing features, was met, or that the product works at all.
   The second analysis of variable importance unveiled two principal findings. First, knowing about the (im-)balance of two activities is a more important predictor for Fire Drill severity than knowing how much time was spent on the activities. This is an important finding, as the balance between two activities is a relative metric. The phenomenological descriptions, as well as the results of our qualitative analysis, both support this. This result means that, at least on average, it is of greater relevance to know how diverging any two activities are, rather than their concrete amount (cumulative probability). Rather than waiting until the project end to calculate the amount of each activity in each segment, we can observe how activities diverge in a single segment intermittently and use this as an indicator in the future. The second important finding is that segments (project phases) are, except for a few cases, almost equally important (also, no phase has (near-)zero importance, Hyp. 2.2).
   The third analysis was designed to determine whether a robust, reliable, and low-risk predictive model can be obtained. The designed adaptive training workflow showed that we can obtain a suitable model from those data (Pr. 3.1, Hyp. 3.1). With sufficient confidence as our stability criterion, we demonstrate that models trained on as few as 15 instances will completely automate severity assessment in the future, within acceptable confidence intervals (Pr. 3.2). Both sources of data individually, source code or issue-tracking, are suitable for this task (Hyp. 3.2). Generally, we observe that the adaptive training flow converges nicely with increasing amounts of training data. Clearly, the stability of the model is closely related to the amount of available training data. As for RQ 3.2, the precise threshold for stable depends on the application, but we figure that to predict the severity of the Fire Drill in our case and context, a model trained on 15 to 25 instances would deliver sufficient stability, as the results would not be misleading, even when off slightly.
6.2. Validity, limitations, replicability, and generalizability
The choice to conduct an embedded case study was a natural one, given the principal objective and the previous pilot study [51]. Our study is of longitudinal character, as the same course was studied repeatedly and projects were selected over a duration of three years. Each project is unique with regard to individuals, groups, social structure, software, etc., and it is unlikely that the same set of events unfolds again in the same way [97]. Therefore, to maximize reliability and minimize bias, projects were selected from each year. Instead of conducting a case study for each project, we chose a common case and
context that allows us to collect and analyze quantitative data as well, especially since we   33
intended to backpropagate the gained knowledge to the phenomenological descriptions and, therefore, the studied case.
   A case study should be chosen when conducting an empirical investigation of a contem- porary phenomenon in its real-life context, especially when the phenomenon cannot be clearly separated from its context [55]. Furthermore, a variety of data sources is required (see Section 1.1). The Fire Drill is a phenomenon that is always embedded in some (social) context it cannot be separated from, and it is not the goal of this study to propose or attempt a separation. Instead, we have made extensive efforts to minimize the impact our study may have. In order to maximize the degree to which this study can be (partially) replicated, we outline an extensive protocol (see Section 4) and publish all original data [62] and experimental designs [78]. Construct validity is achieved by a variety of measures, such as the usage of multiple data sources and observers (triangulation), ascertaining of inter-rater reliability, and controlled experiments (e.g., many repeats, model averaging, training with stability criterion, etc.). Independent raters and an assessor use systematic protocols, which allowed us to suggest and confirm chains of causality and ensure repeatability and replicability. The usage of two completely independent data sources (source code and issue-tracking) provided a second perspective that we exploited to corroborate our findings. The limitations of the obtained results lie in the external validity and generalizability.
Results such as the predictive model, weighted mixtures, or variable importance do not have validity outside the studied context, as it introduced constraints that force the phenomenon to take certain turns. We have observed a great number of concrete instances of symptoms and consequences. Although extensive, these observations cannot be exhaustive, nor can their distribution be representative outside our context. This is similarly true for the asymptomatic, counter-indicative observations. The Fire Drill shares similarities and indicators with other kindred phenomena, which are also based on temporal accumulations of activities (see Section 3.1.2). Therefore, we expect the external validity of the protocol suggested for studies of these phenomena. The generalizability of this study comes from subsequent and replicating case studies. For example, one study may examine the pattern "Half Done is Enough" in the same context and another one the Fire Drill in an industrial context. Only with a sufficient amount of case studies will we be able to reach a definitive understanding of the Fire Drill and how it does (not) manifest in certain contexts.
7. Conclusions and future work
We have shown that activity-based detection of complex phenomena is viable and can be used to reduce the otherwise required amount of expert-based, qualitative, and extensive analyses. Our work has several practical implications. First, instances of maintenance activities are plentifully found in typical software projects and make for highly cost-effective and robust features. Second, an existing ground truth can be leveraged to make sense out of these quantitative features. Third, predictive models using these features require only a few observations (projects) to produce low-risk predictions. Last, A well-trained model can produce predictions that are accurate enough such that they can support or (partially) replace the expensive, error-prone, and expert-based evaluations. The practical implication is that such a model can be reused on only the quantitative data (e.g., we have shown that the commits of the repository are sufficient) of future projects for predicting
the severity of complex phenomena. This may be useful in circumstances where a fast    34
and computationally cheap analysis is required to, e.g., quickly filter and flag (for a full follow-up in-depth qualitative analysis) projects affected by a problem.
7.1. Synthesis
For an embedded case study, it is important to synthesize all results and to backpropagate them to the studied case [25]. We have presented results from each project's individual, qualitative, and idiographic study, as well as results from the quantitative, nomothetic analysis across all projects (see Section 5).
   We studied the Fire Drill as is embedded within a software engineering course. For this specific case and its surrounding context, we predominantly find results that are in agreement with the phenomenological descriptions. The in-depth individual study of each project, as well as a common evaluation across projects, allowed us to find explanations for all the results diverging from it. In affected projects, we observe typical peculiarities of a Fire Drill, such as management that stalls development, or late-stage rushes. While the anti-pattern suggests renegotiating the final deadline as one solution, the students truncated the scope of their applications to mitigate the fallout, thereby implementing the only valid refactored solution within the course. We gather the most significant symptoms and consequences of a Fire Drill within the course. Evaluation of total and average severity showed that project risk, poor communication, and a compromised project schedule or -scope are the biggest problems that students encounter. We learn that a Fire Drill may affect a project as a whole, but we also observe micro instances affecting single iterations. It was previously suggested and now confirmed by us that the Fire Drill is an anti-pattern that can be the result of, encompass, or cause other, often conceptually smaller anti-patterns such as "Analysis Paralysis" or "Cart Before The Horse". We find evidence that is counter-indicative of a Fire Drill and observe projects that exhibit evidence both for and against its presence, simultaneously. Raters are able to identify this and other circumstances by being provably able to confidently agree on a severity. Our conjecture that descoping makes for a strong predictor is confirmed; projects are affected by it over the course of their entire lifecycle and the amount of time wasted on it consistently increases. We conclude that the Fire Drill is an anti-pattern that was deliberately described vaguely, but that it is still possible to derive concrete and specific problem instances from it. Observing only a few instances proved sufficient for building low-risk predictive models that can exploit activities that are modeled after either source code or issue-tracking data, as both kinds of data sources are eligible for the task.
   We suggest that other phenomena that are characterized by activities that can be captured and analyzed similarly can be subjected to the methodology presented in this work. Therefore, we intend for the methodology to be the main contribution. Our empirical observations are likely valid in other similar cases and contexts, too, but subsequent (partially) replicating case studies will have to show this. Most patterns today are only described from anecdotes or other literature (phenomenological descriptions), but rarely come with a set of empirical observations attached. We contribute directly to the existing understanding of the Fire Drill by unearthing concrete empirical instances associated with its ascribed symptoms and consequences (the supercategories). More significantly, though, we have shown how to use a (scarce) ground truth to establish an additional, quantitative understanding by leveraging the available data (which was not possible previously), making the Fire Drill perhaps the first pattern-like phenomenon that is
described from both perspectives. Lastly, having uncovered the most frequent and prevalent    35
issues that participants of the course encounter, we will attempt to incorporate the won insights into future editions of the course to improve all participants' experiences.
7.2. Future work
This study is the first to properly replicate the significant findings from the previous pilot study [51]. We intend to replicate this study with other related and similar phenomena. Candidates are, for example, Cart Before the Horse, Half Done is Enough, the Net-negative Producing Programmer, the Lone Wolf, Nine Pregnant Women (a variant of Brook's law), or Analysis Paralysis. We also encourage conducting (partial) replication studies with the same or a different phenomenon and alterations to the context, especially in industrial settings. It might also be worthwhile to consider additional artifacts found in the application lifecycle management data for data triangulation. Additional analyses, such as an earned value analysis, might provide additional corroboration, especially when its result can be correlated with the maintenance activities. Subsequent studies that analyze the Fire Drill will contribute towards a more complete picture of the phenomenon. Studies using other phenomena will also help to increase the margin between phenomena, making them more distinguishable from each other. Once a sufficient number of case studies were conducted, a multiple case study should be performed that summarizes all findings.